Special Report No 7/2013
(pursuant to Article 287(4), second subparagraph, TFEU)


Has the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund delivered EU added value in re-integrating 
redundant workers? 

together with the Commission’s replies






	CONTENTS
	
	Paragraph
Glossary
Executive summary	I-V
Introduction	1-8
Audit scope and approach	9-13
Observations	14-71
Nearly all workers were offered personalised 
and well-coordinated measures	14-24
Services were personalised	17-18
EGF measures were generally well-coordinated 
with national measures and the ESF	19-21
Some Member States preferred the ESF over the EGF	22-24
Re-integration into employment of EGF supported workers 
cannot be reliably assessed	25-46
Lack of re-integration objectives and specific 
EGF performance data	29-34
Re-integration data were difficult to compare	35-46
One third of EGF funding compensates national workers’ 
income support schemes, with no EU added value	47-59
Workers’ income support measures represent the majority 
of the co-funded expenditure for half of the cases audited	51-53
Globally, workers’ income support measures account 
for one third of re-funded costs	54-56
Different EGF co-funding in similar economic circumstances	57-59
The EGF approval procedure is too long for an emergency fund	60-71
The assessment procedure could be shortened	63-65
The budgetary and empowerment procedures 
have a further impact on timeliness	66-67
The EGF approval procedure is not timely	68-69
In the end, the budgetary authority approved all 
the projects submitted by the Commission	70-71
Conclusions and recommendations	72-81
Nearly all eligible workers were offered personalised 
and well-coordinated measures	73-75
Re-integration into employment of EGF supported workers 
cannot be reliably assessed	76
One third of EGF funding compensates national workers’income support 
schemes, with no EU added value	77-79
The EGF approval procedure is too long for an emergency fund	80-81

The Commission’s replies



GLOSSARY
DG Budget
Directorate General for the Budget 
DG 
Employment, 
Social Affairs 
and Inclusion
Directorate General for Employment, Social Affairs and 
Inclusion 
ECA
European Court of Auditors (or “the Court”)
EGF
European Globalisation Adjustment Fund
ESF
European Social Fund
EU added 
value
The EU added value is the value that an EU action adds to the 
value that would otherwise have been created by Member 
States acting alone.


OECD
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development; 21 
EU Member States are currently members of the OECD.
Workers’ 
income 
support
Cash expenditure compensating for unemployment. This 
includes redundancy payments out of public resources as well 
as pensions to beneficiaries before they reach the 'standard' 
pensionable age if these payments are made because they are 
out of work or otherwise for reasons of labour market policy. 
See “An Interpretative Guide to the OECD Social Expenditure 
Database”, OECD, 2007.
?
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
I.	The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund (EGF) was established in 
2006 to show EU solidarity towards workers affected by mass redundancies. 
The EGF should facilitate the re-integration into employment of those workers 
by providing financial contributions for time-limited and coordinated packages 
of personalised services. Such packages include active labour market 
measures such as training, aid for self-employment, coaching and 
outplacement. They also often include income support and other allowances 
paid to workers.
II.	The European Social Fund (ESF) also supports redundant workers, mainly 
through lifelong learning programmes. However, whereas the purpose of the 
ESF is to address long-term structural imbalances, the EGF was designed to 
address short-term and ad-hoc emergency situations. 
III.	Until 31 December 2012, EGF aid packages represented 627 million euro 
for 89 approved member states applications. The EGF co-finances measures 
at a rate of 50 % or 65 %, with the balance being provided by the Member 
State concerned.
IV.	The Court concluded that:
(a)	Nearly all EGF eligible workers were offered personalised and well-
coordinated measures.
(b)	Each EGF measure may also be eligible for the ESF and some Member 
States preferred to use the ESF rather than EGF.
(c)	 No quantitative re-integration objectives were set. Moreover, existing data 
are not adequate to assess the effectiveness of the measures in re-
integrating workers into employment.
(d)	The EGF delivered EU added value when used to co-finance services for 
redundant workers or allowances not ordinarily existing under Member 
States’ unemployment benefit systems.
(e)	However, in all the audited cases, the Court identified measures to provide 
workers with income support, which would have been paid by the Member 
States anyway. Sixteen of the 19 Member States that benefited from the 
EGF included income support measures in their packages. Globally, 
income support measures represented 33 % of the costs refunded for all 
EGF cases.
(f)	The EGF approval procedure, requiring the need for an ad hoc budgetary 
procedure, is very long. This hampers EU solidarity with the redundant 
workers targeted. 
V.	The Court recommends that:
(a)	The Member States and the Commission take the necessary steps to 
ensure the availability of up-to-date and reliable data in order to monitor the 
achievement of objectives, as well as to compare the outcome of the 
various measures.
(b)	The European Parliament, the Council and the Commission consider 
limiting EU funding to measures likely to provide EU added value, rather 
than funding already existing national workers’ income support schemes.
(c)	The European Parliament, the Council and the Commission consider, as 
an alternative to the current EGF scheme, the possibility of adapting the 
ESF framework and its funding allocations in order to support more rapidly 
workers affected by mass redundancies.
INTRODUCTION
1.	The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund (EGF) was established in 
2006 to show EU solidarity towards workers affected by mass redundancies. 
The EGF should facilitate the re-integration into employment of those workers 
by providing financial contributions for time-limited and coordinated packages 
of personalised services . Such packages include active labour market 
measures such as training, aid for self-employment, coaching and 
outplacement. They also often include income support and other allowances 
paid to workers. 
2.	The EGF is outside the Multi-annual Financial Framework. As a result each 
application for EGF support submitted by a Member State has to pass a 
thorough assessment by the Commission and obtain approval from the EU 
budgetary authority (Council and European Parliament). The Commission 
shares the management of the EGF with the Member States.
3.	Redundant workers can also benefit from the European Social Fund, mainly 
through lifelong learning programmes. However, whereas the purpose of the 
ESF is to address long-term structural imbalances, the EGF was designed to 
address short-term and ad-hoc emergency situations. 
4.	The EGF supports workers made redundant as a result of major structural 
changes in world trade patterns due to globalisation (500 dismissals or more  in 
one or more enterprises in the EU) where those redundancies have a 
significant adverse impact on the regional or local economy (the “trade 
criterion”). In this respect, applicant Member States must demonstrate that the 
redundancies are linked to a substantial increase of imports into the EU, the 
rapid decline of the EU market share in a given sector or a delocalisation to 
third countries.
5.	By way of derogation, from 1 May 2009 to 31 December 2011, the EGF was 
also applicable to workers made redundant as a direct result of the global 
financial and economic crisis (the “crisis criterion”) . 
6.	For instance, when the effects of the crisis devastated the Danish 
shipbuilding industry, there were redundancies as a consequence. In that 
Member State, the EGF supported redundant workers of the last Danish 
shipyard (see Picture 1). Another example is the German automotive supply 
industry, which was particularly hit in the regions of Lower Saxony and North 
Rhine-Westphalia (see Picture 2).
 
Picture 1 - One of the halls of the former Odense Steel Shipyard, now “Hall East”, a 
large 12 400 m2 production hall with 900-tonne crane capacity in Lind? Industrial Park, 
Munkeb?, Denmark. 
© Lind? Industrial Park A/S.
  
Picture 2 - Workers at the former Karmann production site in Osnabrück. 
© European Court of Auditors.
7.	From 9 March 2007 (date of the first application) to 31 December 2012, total 
EGF aid approved amounted to 627 million euro (379 million euro from the EU 
budget and 247 million euro from the Member States) for 89 approved 
applications  from a maximum yearly budgetary ceiling of 500 million euro 
during the 2007-2013 period. The EGF co-finances measures at a rate of 50 % 
or 65 % , with the difference coming from the Member State concerned. 
8.	The EGF is currently scheduled to run until 31 December 2013. The 
Commission has however proposed to continue with a new EGF Regulation 
until 31 December 2020 .
AUDIT SCOPE AND APPROACH
9.	The overall objective of the audit was to assess the contribution made by 
the EGF, in the form of EU added value, to enabling redundant workers to 
return to the labour market as soon as possible. The Court examined in 
particular the following questions:
(a)	Did all affected workers benefit from personalised EGF measures, and 
were EGF co-financed active labour market measures coordinated with 
other similar measures (i.e. ESF and Member State measures)?
(b)	Was the EGF effective in terms of labour market re-integration? 
(c)	Is the nature of the EGF measures likely to deliver EU added value?
(d)	Was the EGF approval procedure implemented in a timely manner?
10.	Eight cases in four Member States (two each in Denmark, Germany, Ireland 
and Lithuania) in which the EGF was deployed, were audited on the spot. 
They amounted to 67 million euro out of 627 million euro (10,7 %) of EGF aid 
committed until 31 December 2012. The sample of eight cases only comprised 
implemented cases and reflected the different sizes of EU economies, the 
diversity of the economic sectors affected and important differences between 
the EGF intervention criteria (see Table 1).


Table 1 - Overview of audited EGF cases1

 
 
1 All the EGF case names mentioned here above were strictly assigned by the 
Commission. They are featured on the EGF webpage of the Commission’s DG 
Employment, Social Affairs and Inclusion website (http://ec.europa.eu/social/), but also 
in the EGF Statistical Portrait (2007-2011) issued by the Commission publically. In the 
event EGF case names would refer directly or indirectly to names of undertakings, the 
reader should not link these undertakings to any statement in this Special Report or 
any statement issued by the Court and related to this Special Report. The 
undertakings named are neither EGF beneficiaries, nor managers of the EGF cases 
audited.
Source: European Commission.

11.	The audit covered the period from 1 January 2007 to 31 December 2012. 
The audit was carried out through interviews, the examination of documents 
held by the Commission and the four audited Member States authorities, and 
an analysis of the data on re-integration rates.The audit in the Member States 
also included the organisation of eight focus group meetings at which the 
various local EGF stakeholders (academics, administrations and social 
partners) could share their views (see Picture 3). 
  
Picture 3 - Academics and experts at a focus group moderated by two ECA auditors 
on EGF support for the Lithuanian construction sector. 
© ECA.
12.	In addition to the above, the results of the Commission’s mid-term 
evaluation of the EGF were analysed . The mid-term evaluation report of 
December 2011 covered the first 15 cases  co-financed by the EGF in eight 
Member States. One of these (Nokia, Germany) was included in the sample 
audited on-the-spot by the Court.
13.	Finally, the Court carried out a survey by addressing questionnaires to 
Member States (Bulgaria, Estonia, Cyprus, Latvia, Luxembourg, Hungary, 
Slovakia and the United Kingdom) in order to identify the reasons why they did 
not use the EGF.
OBSERVATIONS
Nearly all workers were offered personalised and well-coordinated 
measures 
14.	In order to demonstrate solidarity to all affected workers personalised 
measures should be offered not only to the workers made redundant in the 
main enterprise affected, but also to those employed by suppliers of that 
enterprise. 
15.	In the audited cases nearly all affected workers could benefit from EGF 
measures. No instances of the intentional exclusion of potential beneficiaries 
were identified.
16.	However in the cases of Karmann and Dell, the Court found that an 
unknown number of redundant workers formerly employed by the affected 
enterprises’ suppliers were not included in any EGF support measure .The 
main reasons for non-inclusion lay in the difficulties faced by Member States in 
assessing which suppliers were affected. 
Services were personalised
17.	Services offered to the potential beneficiaries were generally tailored to their 
needs and therefore most likely to get results. This positive aspect already 
reported by the mid-term evaluation was confirmed by the Court’s assessment 
of the eight EGF cases audited. Concrete examples of personalised services 
are provided in Box 1.
?
Box 1 - Three cases of packages of personalised services in Ireland and 
Denmark
In the case of Dell, the Irish authorities provided child care support and distance 
learning services. County and City Enterprise Boards delivered special courses for 
redundant Dell workers (“Start Your Own Business”), as well as mentoring to cope with 
administrative procedures. 
In the case of SR Technics, some courses, such as aeronautics courses with the Irish 
Aviation Authority, had been specifically designed. Where relevant courses could not 
be provided specifically for redundant workers, grants were released to allow them to 
take part in appropriate courses delivered to a larger population (80 % were technical 
courses or aviation industry-related). For the first time ever in Ireland, the Training and 
Employment Authority worked together with the Department of Defence and the 
Department of Education and Skills to set up apprenticeships for civilians.
In Denmark (Odense Steel Shipyard (I)), the EGF facilitated the implementation of 
high quality training measures. These measures were of a more long-term and 
personalised nature and leading to qualifications superior to those which were 
normally offered to unemployed persons, and the possibility of sectoral reconversion. 
According to several participants in the focus group organised by the auditors, the 
personalised services went well beyond the scope of national personalised measures 
and were perceived as a unique opportunity, as they gave redundant workers 
ownership of their personal re-integration project.
18.	In Ireland, the applications did not always establish the link between 
personalised services and actual labour market needs. As a result, at this 
stage, it was not identified whether the measures put forward were best suited 
to support the re-integration of the redundant workers.
EGF measures were generally well-coordinated with national measures 
and the ESF
19.	In order to maximise theeffects of EGF measures, the EGF Regulation 
states that they should always take the form of a coordinated package of 
personalised services. What is meant is coordination with measures preceding 
or concomitant to the personalised services co-financed by the EGF . Member 
States should also coordinate their interventions with the Structural Funds , in 
particular the ESF.
20.	The Court observed that, generally, the Member States effectively 
coordinated the EGF with ESF and national labour market measures. Existing 
ESF measures were usually complemented by additional EGF measures 
specifically designed to address workers’ needs. 
21.	Moreover, for the eight audited cases, the Court did not detect instances of 
overlap between the different measures, or double-funding of individuals. 
Some Member States preferred the ESF over the EGF
22.	Although the ESF is not expected to address unforeseeable events, all 
measures under the EGF Regulation may equally be applied under the ESF . 
Whether or not the ESF may co-finance support for workers subject to a mass 
redundancy caused by an unforeseeable event, essentially depends on the 
national eligibility rules and the content of operational programmes. 
23.	The Court’s survey of Member States having never used the EGF 
intervention concluded on the following reasons for preferring the ESF over the 
EGF:
(a)	The higher co-financing rate for the ESF (up to 85 %) than for the EGF (up 
to 65 %) is a disincentive to apply for the latter. This was stated by six 
Member States  and had already been recognised by the Commission in 
2010 .
(b)	The ESF can be implemented more swiftly than the EGF, or national 
administrations are more familiar with the ESF .
(c)	The lack of EGF pre-financing . 
(d)	The length of the procedure for approving EGF applications .
24.	The more restrictive EGF conditions, in particular the trade criterion, are 
another reason why the ESF is preferred over the EGF. After a mass 
redundancy, some Member States may find it easier to redirect ESF funding 
towards support for redundant workers rather than apply for EGF funding. For 
instance, the British authorities never requested EGF assistance in spite of 
having identified 18 cases that might have qualified for such support .
Re-integration into employment of EGF supported workers cannot be 
reliably assessed
25.	In order to assess the performance of a fund it is necessary to monitor and 
evaluate its results and impacts and to compare them to other schemes having 
similar objectives. Taking into account its objective the EGF’s most relevant 
performance indicator is its capacity to reintegrate  redundant workers. 
26.	The Court verified that the re-integration rates calculated as a percentage of 
the re-integrated workers out of the affected workers were available for all eight 
audited cases. Table 2 shows these percentages for different standard cut-off 
periods.

Table 2 - Re-integration rates for the eight audited cases



 
Notes:
-	All data based on Member State data. Reintegration data are not precise.
-	Reintegrated participants are either self-employed or employed in the labour 
market at the time in question.
-	NA = Number or percentage of workers not available.
Source: Member States.
27.	Whilst re-integration data at the end of the EGF measures was available for 
all employers except the case of SR Technics, data were often not available 
(“NA”) for the other cut-off periods shown in Table 2. In the case of Odense 
Steel Shipyard (I), due to the timing of the EGF measures , there were no data 
available about the situation of affected workers after one year. A complete 
overview was possible only for Lithuania. The table shows that the EGF made 
a certain contribution to the re-integration of redundant workers. 
28.	In the most successful example (“Construction” case, Lithuania), 59 % of all 
the redundant workers were re-integrated at the end of the EGF measures. The 
lowest rate of re-integration at that stage was 21 % of workers immediately re-
integrated after the end of the EGF assistance (Dell case, Ireland). Taking the 
situation 12 months after the end of the EGF measures, the highest re-
integration rate reported was 68 % (Karmann case, Germany); however, in only 
four of the eight cases were any data available at that stage. 
Lack of re-integration objectives and specific EGF performance data 
29.	A multiplicity of factors adversely affected the quality and availability of re-
integration data. Firstly, the Member States generally did not set quantitative 
re-integration objectives. Out of the eight cases audited only one   included 
such an element. As a result, it is not possible to assess the measures’ 
effectiveness in terms of achieving their objectives.
30.	Secondly, in Germany, Denmark and Ireland, the public or private 
employment services, when collecting re-integration data, did not 
systematically differentiate between the EGF, the ESF and other national 
measures specifically designed for workers affected by mass redundancies. 
31.	For instance, in Germany, the combination of several ESF and EGF-funded 
training modules made it difficult to isolate the impact of individual measures, or 
groups of measures, on re-integration . External factors (overall economic 
situation, involvement of Volkswagen in the case of Karmann, employment 
subsidies) also had an important impact on re-integration.
32.	Thirdly, Member State authorities audited generally did not distinguish 
between the two main kinds of EGF measures: 
(a)	active labour market measures such as training, aid for self-employment, 
coaching and outplacement;
(b)	income support paid to workers.
33.	Whilst this significant distinction was absent in Germany, Denmark and 
Ireland, the Lithuanian managing authority went so far as to provide re-
integration data that distinguished between the workers participating in each of 
the various measures.
34.	In addition, there is no specific information, allowing the identification of the 
ESF co-financed projects that could actually have met the EGF intervention 
criteria. This identification would have been useful in order to make 
comparisons between the re-integration rates achieved by funds with different 
budgetary, legal and operational arrangements. In turn, this would have 
contributed towards measuring the impact of EGF. The insufficient quality 
(inaccuracy, incompleteness and inconsistency) of ESF monitoring information 
available has already been highlighted in previous performance audits by the 
Court. In particular, the Commission does not have consistent and reliable 
performance data on EU supported targets, and its assessment and 
supervision are currently not oriented towards performance .
Re-integration data were difficult to compare
35.	Comparing re-integration data is a difficult exercice under any 
circumstances. As stated in the EGF mid-term evaluation both supply-side (the 
qualifications of redundant workers) and demand-side factors (local economic 
and labour market conditions) influenced the re-integration results . 
36.	However, in the context of the EGF an additional element hampered this 
comparison. This refers to the differences between the timing of the EGF and 
that of other labour market actions, as those workers in greater need of help 
were left to the EGF, which is relatively slower to implement (see Box 2 and 
paragraph 42). 
37.	In particular, given that the ESF and EGF both support the training and re-
integration of the unemployed, such a comparison is necessary with respect to 
sound financial management as it could highlight potential structural problems. 
The example below (Box 2) illustrates this.
Box 2 - Nokia’s transfer companies – unequal performance owing to differences 
in timing
The mobile phone company Nokia closed its Bochum (North-Rhine-Westphalia) site 
on 30 June 2008. Three transfer companies (as they are called under German law) 
were successively set up to accommodate temporarily redundant workers.
The first transfer company (exclusively supported by ESF funding), was set up in June 
2008, seven months before Germany even applied for the EGF. That company yielded 
a re-integration rate of 66 %. The third and last transfer company was only set up 
when EGF funding was applied for, in February 2009; it achieved a re-integration rate 
of 4,35 %.
The Nokia case speaks volumes – not because ESF funding performed so much 
better than the EGF, but because the ESF proved quicker to mobilise than the EGF 
and thus delivered better re-integration results. Indeed, the EGF alone had to cater for 
persons with more difficult cases and who could not be successfully re-integrated by 
the previous transfer companies.
38.	The above example shows that timeliness is one of the most important 
criteria when a fund including re-integration objectives aims at some degree of 
success. The Nokia case also shows that the EGF and ESF both supported the 
same target group, but for reasons diametrically opposed to the purpose for 
which each fund was designed. The ESF, a structural fund, alleviated an 
emergency; the EGF, an emergency fund, supported those whom it was more 
difficult to reintegrate. 
39.	In fact the EGF and ESF intervene as complementary funds which provide 
either long-term strategic help, or act as a one-off time-limited and specific 
response to a single restructuring emergency.
Germany
40.	The managing authority did not consider a comparison between different 
sets of re-integration data to be feasible. As a result, it neither identified a 
comparable statistical population group for the group of EGF beneficiaries, nor 
made a comparison with overall re-integration rates at Federal level.
Denmark
41.	Due to missing data, no comparison was possible between the re-
integration results of EGF project participants and general re-integration rates 
outside the audited cases. 
Ireland
42.	Surveys conducted by the managing authority concluded that, within the 
same time frame, the employment rate for redundant workers who did not 
benefit from the EGF was higher than the employment rate for EGF 
beneficiaries. The difference in employment rates can be partially explained by 
the fact that some persons did not finalise training or education pathways.
43.	Nonetheless, according to the managing authority, a probable cause of the 
EGF’s lower re-integration rate in Ireland would be differences between the 
profiles of redundant workers, the most skilled workers finding a job without 
EGF help.
Lithuania
44.	EGF re-integration results varied significantly from one EGF project to 
another, depending on the measures implemented and the target group 
addressed, which made a straightforward comparison impossible.
The Commission
45.	Monitoring information was only available to the Commission in the form of 
the EGF final reports, six months after the end of the implementation period. 
However, as a result of the inconsistency and unreliability of the re-integration 
data (see paragraphs 25 to 44), these reports prevent any reasonable 
comparison between different EGF cases, or between the measures applied in 
each case.
46.	In particular, the final reports do not provide an in-depth analysis of the 
nature and the percentage of allowances paid or committed for all the  EGF 
cases approved so far. Furthermore, the Commission’s database did not allow 
the identification and fund allocation of the individual EGF measures nor 
performance indicators like participation figures or re-integration rates. Also, no 
information is provided on the individual ESF or national measures having 
preceded or complemented the EGF ones.
One third of EGF funding compensates national workers’ income support 
schemes, with no EU added value
47.	The EU added value goes beyond the concept of simple added value. It can 
be defined as the value that an EU action adds to the value that would 
otherwise have been created by Member States acting alone. In particular, 
expenditure from the EU budget must offer clear and visible benefits for the EU 
and its citizens which, by reason of the scale or effects of the proposed action, 
are better achieved at Union level . 
48.	The Court refers in particular to the OECD definition of active labour market 
programmes.  Accordingly, measures aiming at the improvement of the 
beneficiaries’ prospect of finding gainful employment or otherwise increasing 
their earnings’ capacity are qualified as active and therefore are considered to 
meet the conditions for an EU added value. These measures  include not only 
services such as training, aid for self-employment, coaching and outplacement, 
but also mobility allowances and educational grants, as well as allowances 
granted in the context of the EGF and not ordinarily existing under the Member 
State’s unemployment benefit system. 
49.	By contrast, workers’ income support measures, consisting of 
unemployment benefits and programmes for early retirement, cannot be 
considered as delivering EU added value. Indeed, workers’ income support 
does not represent an ‘active’ labour market measure  and moreover this 
reduces the share of these measures in the EGF package. In the mid-term 
evaluation, the Commission had already reported that on average only 26 % of 
EGF spending consisted of training measures .
50.	As can be seen in Table 3 below, a common pattern among the eight 
audited cases is that they included EGF measures to provide income support, 
which would have been paid by the Member States anyway, irrespective of 
EGF intervention. The impact of this type of EGF intervention is to compensate 
part of the cost of the Member States’ unemployment benefit system, and there 
is no added value in such an intervention other than EU additional funding for 
the Member States.
Workers’ income support measures represent the majority of the co-
funded expenditure for half of the cases audited
51.	For each of the cases of the audited sample the Court calculated the 
amounts of EGF funding committed to the different types of measures and in 
particular to workers’ income support (see Table 3). 
Table 3 - Breakdown of EGF funding by type of personalised measures in 
the eight EGF cases audited

 

Source: ECA, based on available data from DG Employment, Social Affairs and 
Inclusion and Member State authorities.
52.	In six of the eight cases shown in Table 3, the EGF packages included a 
relatively high proportion of income support. Indeed, in Germany and Denmark, 
one case in Ireland and one in Lithuania, more than a third of the total value of 
the respective packages of personalised measures was composed of income 
support. 
53.	In the particular cases audited in Germany and Denmark, training measures 
meant to re-skill or up-skill redundant workers represented only a third or less 
of the respective EGF packages. On the other side, income support measures 
in the form of unemployment benefits or the equivalent represented 50 % to 
73 %. In those cases, moreover, the link between a redundant worker’s income 
support and his/her effective participation in an EGF funded labour market 
measure such as training could not systematically be established.
Globally, workers’ income support measures account for one third of re-
funded costs
54.	In the absence of a satisfactory EGF database of cases, the Court 
examined the Member State application data collected by the Commission for 
each of the 89 EGF cases for which information was available and relevant. It 
was found (see Table 4) that 33 % of EGF support for workers (thus excluding 
technical assistance to Member States) was composed of income support 
measures such as unemployment benefits.
Table 4 - Breakdown of EGF funding by type of personalised measures 
and by Member States

 
Notes:
-	All amounts in euro as of 31 December 2012.
-	Rejected and withdrawn cases have been excluded.
Source: ECA, based on Commission data available for 89 approved applications .

55.	Six Member States have been allocated 29 % of the total EGF co-financing 
and 89 % of all the income support measures approved to date. As well as 
Germany and Denmark, the six included Austria, Italy, France and Malta . 
56.	The Court also notes that the Commission’s proposal for the next 
Multiannual Financial Framework seeks to limit EGF support in the form of 
allowances, which include workers’ income support, to a maximum of 50 % of 
any EGF package . 
Different EGF co-funding in similar economic circumstances
57.	The Court notes inconsistent outcomes in similar economic circumstances 
with respect to workers’ income support measures in the case of Germany as 
compared to Austria , which are the two most intensive users of this kind of 
EGF support.
58.	O Germany considered for EGF funding purposes that the duration of the 
training or qualification measures  represent slightly less than half of workers’ 
normal working time . By contrast, Austria considered that similar measures 
represented 100 % of the normal working time. This is due to the fact that the 
Austrian short-term allowance scheme provides for a definition of full-time 
occupation to be as low as 50 % of the normal working time.
59.	 As a consequence of these different national decisions, EGF co-funding of 
short-term allowance represented proportionally the double in Austrian cases 
when compared to German cases. The Court notes however that this 
difference in the EGF funding decision did not affect ultimately the individuals 
as they received in full the allowances foreseen in the national schemes.
The EGF approval procedure is too long for an emergency fund
60.	In order to maximise its impact the EGF should be able to provide its 
financial contribution rapidly in order to allow the affected workers to benefit of 
the funded measures as soon as possible after having been made redundant.
61.	After having established the average length of the approval procedure, the 
Court assessed to what extent it can be made shorter taking into account the 
different legal provisions and rules to be respected.
62.	The EGF approval procedure is the process from the moment a Member 
State officially applies until the Commission and the Budgetary Authority 
commit the financial contribution to an EGF case. It can be divided into 
consecutive stages (called later assessment procedure, budgetary procedure 
and empowerment procedure), which last together on average 41 weeks.
Graph - Schematised view of the EGF approval procedure
 
The assessment procedure could be shortened
63.	The assessment procedure is composed of the appraisal procedure and the 
Commission’s internal consultation procedures leading to the adoption of the 
proposal for a decision by the budgetary authority. It takes on average 
30 weeks. 
64.	The appraisal procedure takes on average 15 weeks when taking as a 
starting point the date of the official application of the Member State, but it is 
much longer when taking into account informal exchange of information 
between the responsible Member State authority and the Commission.
65.	One of the factors contributing to the length of the appraisal procedure is 
the possibility foreseen in the EGF Regulation to supplement Member State 
applications any time after they officially applied. Introducing a time limit to this 
possibility as well as taking stock of learning curve benefits may reduce the 
length of 15 weeks necessary to appraise applications of Member States who 
are in emergency situations. The subsequent internal consultations within the 
Commission also take 15 weeks on average.
The budgetary and empowerment procedures have a further impact on 
timeliness
66.	As the EGF operates outside of the Multi-Annual Financial Framework, 
each EGF case is subject to a specific budgetary procedure in order to make 
available the related appropriations. In practice, this means that once the 
Commission has identified sufficient margins and/or cancelled commitments, 
the decision to deploy them has to be taken by the budgetary authority . This 
budgetary procedure requires an additional and incompressible period of 
approximately seven weeks. 
67.	Then the empowerment procedure completes the approval procedure, 
leading to the adoption of the formal decision to pay a financial contribution. Its 
length, an average of 4 weeks, is closely linked to the provisions of the 
Commission’s rules of procedure . Finally, once agreed, the financial 
contribution is paid to the Member State concerned.
The EGF approval procedure is not timely
68.	To conclude, the approval procedure is very long, especially considering 
that the EGF is supposed to be an emergency fund. In the mid-term evaluation 
report, evaluators already pointed out to the Commission in 2011 that the long 
EGF approval procedure could be considered too slow to offer a genuinely 
‘rapid response’ mechanism in times of crisis.
69.	The length of the entire approval procedure is of an average of 11 weeks 
longer than for an ordinary financing decision of the Commission.
In the end, the budgetary authority approved all the projects submitted by 
the Commission 
70.	The budgetary authority has approved all proposals submitted by the 
Commission. Only one out of 114 applications has ever been rejected. This is 
likely due to the Commission’s very effective support for Member States during 
the application stage. Indeed, in all of the eight audited cases the Court found 
sufficient evidence of effective support for the Member States. 
71.	Furthermore, not one audited or surveyed Member State authority 
expressed dissatisfaction with respect to the Commission service responsible 
for the EGF, but pointed instead to issues concerning the EGF procedure as a 
whole rather than the quality of support.


CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
72.	The Court is aware of the need for showing EU solidarity towards workers 
affected by redundancies resulting from changes in world trade patterns. 
However, the Court is not convinced that all the features of the current EGF 
mechanism are the most appropriate to deliver specific support with EU added 
value to redundant workers.
Nearly all eligible workers were offered personalised and well-
coordinated measures
73.	Nearly all eligible workers could benefit from personalised EGF measures. 
However, in some cases redundant workers formerly employed by the 
suppliers of an affected enterprise were not included in EGF support 
(paragraphs 14 to 18).
74.	In general, EGF support was well coordinated with ESF and national labour 
market measures, in that existing measures were complemented by additional 
EGF measures specifically designed to address workers’ needs (paragraphs 19 
to 21).
75.	Whereas the ESF is intended to address long-term structural imbalances, 
the EGF was designed to address short-term and ad-hoc emergency situations. 
Although the ESF is not expected to address unforeseeable events, all 
measures under the EGF Regulation may equally be applied under the ESF. 
Some Member States have preferred to deploy the ESF rather than the EGF 
owing to the higher co-financing rate, quicker implementation and the 
availability of pre-financing, as well as the lengthy approval procedure and 
more restrictive conditions under EGF (paragraphs 22 to 24).
Re-integration into employment of EGF supported workers cannot be 
reliably assessed
76.	Re-integration data exist but are not sufficiently accurate, consistent or 
detailed for any conclusions to be drawn. As a result, no useful comparisons or 
benchmarking could be made between EGF measures within an EGF case, 
EGF cases between one another or EGF cases against other active labour 
market programmes. No quantitative re-integration objectives were set 
(paragraphs 25 to 46).
Recommendation 1
In order to improve the quality of the information on the achievements of the different 
cases and on the effectiveness of measures supporting redundant workers, the 
Member States and the Commission should take the necessary steps to ensure the 
availability of up-to-date and reliable data in order to monitor the achievement of 
objectives, as well as to compare the outcome of the various measures.
One third of EGF funding compensates national workers’ income support 
schemes, with no EU added value
77.	When used to co-finance services for redundant workers or allowances not 
ordinarily existing under Member State unemployment benefit systems, the 
EGF delivered EU added value. This refers in particular to active measures 
aiming at the improvement of the beneficiaries’ prospect of finding gainful 
employment or otherwise increasing their earnings’ capacity such as training, 
aid for self-employment, coaching and outplacement, mobility allowances and 
educational grants (paragraphs 47 to 49).
78.	However, in all the audited cases the Court identified measures to provide 
workers with income support, which would have been paid by the Member 
States anyway. Consequently, the Court considers that only training and direct 
active support measures for redundant workers have an EU added value other 
than additional funding for the Member States. Sixteen of the 19 Member 
States which benefited from the EGF included income support measures in 
their packages. Income support measures represented 33 % of the costs 
refunded for all EGF cases (paragraphs 50 to 56).
79.	The Commission did not sufficiently monitor the weight of workers’ support 
measures (paragraphs 45 to 46). In addition, different Member State decisions 
may result in different EGF co-funding for similar  income support measures 
(paragraphs 57 to 59).
Recommendation 2
The European Parliament, the Council and the Commission should consider limiting 
EU funding to measures likely to provide EU added value, rather than funding already 
existing national workers’ income support schemes.
The EGF approval procedure is too long for an emergency fund
80.	The EGF approval procedure is very long. This has a deterrent effect as 
regards the use of the EGF and consequently hampers EU solidarity with the 
redundant workers targeted. 
81.	In addition, the need for a budgetary procedure  adds to the overall length of 
approval (paragraphs 60 to 69).
Recommendation 3
The European Parliament, the Council and the Commission should consider, as an 
alternative to the EGF scheme, the possibility of adapting the ESF framework in order 
to support more rapidly workers affected by mass redundancies.

This Report was adopted by Chamber II on 10 June 2013.
	For the Court of Auditors

	Vítor Manuel da SILVA CALDEIRA 
	President
 	Regulation (EC) No 1927/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council 
of 20 December 2006 on establishing the European Globalisation Adjustment 
Fund (OJ L 406, 30.12.2006, p. 1), as amended by Regulation (EC) 
No 546/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 June 2009 
(OJ L 167, 29.6.2009, p. 26) - together the “EGF Regulation”. See Article 3 
“Eligible actions”.
 	Until 30 May 2009, the threshold was 1 000 redundant workers.
 	Articles 1 and 2 of EGF Regulation. The crisis criterion effectively only applied, 
under Regulation (EC) No 546/2009, from 18 June 2009 to 31 December 2011. 
 	Until 31 December 2012, Member States introduced 114 applications, out of 
which ten were unsuccessful (one was rejected by the Commission and nine 
withdrawn by the applicant Member State) and 15 were still under the EGF 
approval procedure.
 	Under Articles 1 and 10 of the EGF Regulation, the EGF co-financing rate was 
65 % for all applications submitted from 1 May 2009 to 31 December 2011. 
Before and after that period, the co-financing rate was 50 %.
 	COM(2011) 608 final of 6 October 2011.
 	Mid-term evaluation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund: final report, 
submitted by GHK to DG Employment, Social Affairs and Inclusion, 2011 
(http://.ec.europa.eu/social).
 	BenQ (Germany), Nokia (Germany), Castilla y Leon and Aragon (Spain), 
Catalonia (Spain), DELPHI (Spain), Perlos (Finland), PSA suppliers (France), 
Lombardy (Italy), Piedmont (Italy), Sardinia (Italy), Tuscany (Italy), Alytaus tekstile 
(Lithuania), Textiles (Malta), Lisbon-Alentejo (Portugal) and North-Centre 
(Portugal).
 	Some difficulties in reaching redundant workers of affected suppliers had already 
been identified by the mid-term evaluation. See mid-term evaluation, p. 100.
 	See Article 5 of the EGF Regulation on the coordination information required at 
the application stage, and Article 6 on complementarity and coordination.
 		Articles 5(3) and 6(2) of Regulation (EC) No 1927/2006.
 		Answer given on 19 April 2010 by the Commissioner for Employment and 
Social Affairs to parliamentary question E-1230/2010.
 	Bulgaria, Estonia, Cyprus, Latvia, Hungary and Slovakia. The higher national 
contribution was seen as a clear impediment to applying for the EGF. Replies 
to the ECA survey of Member States that have not used EGF funding, 
October 2012. See also the Issues Paper concerning the permanent changes 
made in 2009 to Regulation (EC) No 1927/2006, “Procedural changes”, 
25-26 January 2011.
 		Answer given on 19 April 2010 by the Commissioner for Employment and 
Social Affairs to parliamentary question E-230/2010.
  		Bulgaria, Cyprus and Hungary.
 		Bulgaria, Estonia, Cyprus, Latvia, Hungary and Slovakia.
 		Mentioned by Estonia, Latvia and Hungary. See also the Issues Paper 
concerning the permanent changes made in 2009 to Regulation (EC) 
No 1927/2006, “Procedural changes”, 25-26 January 2011.
 	According to the Commission, the United Kingdom ESF has been redirected 
towards providing training for redundant workers after mass redundancies.
 	EGF was applied for on 6 October 2011 and the final report would not be due 
before 5 March 2014.
 	Odense Steel Shipyard (I) case: This observation was confirmed by the Court’s 
audit of a sample of individual beneficiaries having benefitted from the EGF. 
The objective was that 25 % of the participants should be in employment 
six months after expiry of the EGF measures. That objective was almost met 
11 months in advance.
 	This observation was confirmed by the audit’s analysis of a  sample of 
individual beneficiaries having benefitted from EGF in Germany, as well as by 
an evaluation of 16 September 2012 commissioned by the managing authority, 
p. 4; Bundesministerium für Arbeit und Soziales, Der Europäische 
Globalisierungsfonds in Deutschland: Eine Untersuchung und Bewertung 
seiner Umsetzung und Potenziale, Oktober 2012, p. 2, 9, 10, 72, 88 
(www.bmas.de).
 	See paragraph 51 of Special Report No 17/2009 concerning vocational training 
actions for women co-financed by the European Social Fund; paragraphs 63 
and 64 of Special Report No 25/2012 Are tools in place to monitor the 
effectiveness of European Social Fund spending on older workers? 
(http://eca.europa.eu).
 		Mid-term evaluation, p. 101 to 102.
 		ECA Opinion No 1/2010 Improving the financial management of the European 
Union budget: Risks and challenges (http://eca.europa.eu).
 	Active labour market programmes - contains all social expenditure (other than 
education) which is aimed at the improvement of the beneficiaries‘ prospect of 
finding gainful employment or to otherwise increase their earnings capacity. 
This category includes spending on public employment services and 
administration, labour market training, special programmes for youth when in 
transition from school to work, labour market programmes to provide or 
promote employment for unemployed and other persons (excluding young and 
disabled persons) and special programmes for the disabled (An Interpretative 
Guide to the OECD Social Expenditure Database, OECD, 2007, p. 14).
 	It is meant here all cash expenditure compensating for unemployment. This 
includes redundancy payments out of public resources as well as pensions to 
beneficiaries before they reach the 'standard' pensionable age if these 
payments are made because they are out of work or otherwise for reasons of 
labour market policy (An Interpretative Guide to the OECD Social Expenditure 
Database, OECD, 2007, p. 15).
 	See mid-term evaluation report, 8 December 2011, p. 42. Produced for the 
Commission, the mid-term evaluation was based on a sample of 15 cases 
approved before the 2009 amendment to the EGF Regulation came into force.
 	See also Table 4.
  	Article 7(1) of COM(2011) 608 final.
 	Steiermark case.
 	This rate was a coefficient calculated on the basis of a telephone survey that 
was conducted for the Nokia application. The coefficient was subsequently 
applied to all other EGF cases in Germany.
 		Paragraph 28 of the Interinstitutional Agreement between the European 
Parliament, the Council and the Commission on budgetary discipline and 
sound financial management, 2006/C 139/01.
 		See Articles 13 to 15 of the Commission’s Rules of Procedure (C(2000) 3614 
of 8 December 2000), as amended by Commission Decision 
2010/138/Euratom of 24 February 2010 (OJ L 55, 5.3.2010, p. 60).