Special Report No 15/2013
(pursuant to Article 287(4), second subparagraph, TFEU)
Has the Environment component of the LIFE Programme been effective?

together with the Commission’s replies





	TABLE OF CONTENTS
	Paragraph
Glossary and Abbreviations
Executive Summary	I - V
Introduction	1 - 6
Funding the environment in the EU	1 - 2
The LIFE Programme	3 - 6
Audit Scope and Approach	7 - 12
Observations	13 - 63
Part I - Design	13 - 38
The large number of objectives of the programme was  
not consistent with the limited available budget	13 - 16
The national allocations hampered competition among  
project proposals	17 - 21
The templates used to evaluate project proposals did  
not require enough justification of the evaluation results,  
which undermined transparency in the selection process	22 - 28
The monitoring framework was not appropriate and this  
hampered efficient programme management	29 - 38
Part II - Implementation	39 - 63
Key aspects of the projects were not always appropriately  
assessed during project selection	41
The Commission’s monitoring of project implementation  
was insufficient in some respects	42 - 49
Low dissemination, sustainability, and replication of  
projects jeopardised the “catalytic” role expected from  
the programme	50 - 63
Conclusions and recommendations	64 - 72

Annex I - The Selection Process
Annex II - ECA assessment of the sample of projects visited

Reply of the Commission



GLOSSARY AND ABBREVIATIONS
Catalyst: An agent that stimulates or precipitates a reaction, development or 
change.
Centralised Management by the European Commission:
-	Direct: The budget implementation tasks are performed directly by 
Commission departments.
-	Indirect: The Commission entrusts tasks of public authority, and in 
particular budget implementation, to agencies created by the Commission 
(executive agencies), traditional agencies or joint undertakings, other bodies 
such as the European Investment Bank or the European Investment Fund, 
national public-sector bodies or bodies governed by private law with a public 
service mission (so-called "national agencies").
DG Environment: Directorate-General for the Environment of the European 
Commission
EC: European Council
Effectiveness: Achieving the objectives set.
Environment Action Programmes (EAPs): These are adopted by the 
European Parliament and the Council and set out the EU’s key environmental 
objectives and priorities. They are multi-annual and aim to identify the EU’s 
major environmental challenges, to set objectives and to provide guidelines. 
The EU’s first environment action programme dates back to 1973. The 6th EAP 
expired in mid-2012. The European Commission has proposed a new 
Environment Action Programme (the 7th) entitled “Living well, within the limits of 
our planet”, which will be considered through the ordinary legislative procedure 
by the European Parliament and the Council of the European Union.
EU: European Union
EU Interest: In the context of LIFE Environment projects, a synonym for 
European Added Value. EU interest means contributing to the achievement of 
the general objectives of EU environmental policy, by targeting a problem with 
significant importance at European level or expecting to generate results that 
would be widely applicable. 
Impact: The positive and negative, primary and secondary long-term effect 
produced by an intervention, directly or indirectly, intended or unintended.
Impact assessment: The assessment of the economic, social and 
environmental consequences of policy and legislative proposals. It is a tool to 
ensure that Commission initiatives and EU legislation are prepared on the basis 
of transparent, comprehensive and balanced evidence. 
Indicator: Quantitative or qualitative factor or variable that provides simple and 
reliable means to measure achievement, to reflect the changes connected to 
an intervention or to help assess the performance. Indicators should be 
relevant, accepted, credible, easy and robust (“RACER” criteria). 
(a)	Input indicators: These measure the quantity, quality, and timeliness of 
resources provided for an intervention.
(b)	Output indicators: These measure deliverables created or provided by the 
intervention. They provide information to assess the efficient use of inputs.
(c)	Outcomes indicators: Result and Impact Indicators
-	Result indicators: These measure the immediate or short-term results 
of the implementation of the intervention. They provide key information 
on the extent to which an intervention achieves its objectives. 
-	Impact indicators: These measure positive and negative, primary and 
secondary longer-term effects produced by an intervention, directly or 
indirectly, intended or unintended. 
Integrated Projects: projects implementing on a large territorial scale, in 
particular on a regional, multi-regional or national scale; environmental or 
climate strategies or action plans required by specific EU environmental or 
climate legislation, pursuant to other EU acts or developed by Member States’ 
authorities.
Intervention: Any action or operation carried out by public authorities or other 
organisations, regardless of its nature (policy, programme, measure or project).
LIFE: L’Instrument Financier pour l’Environnement (The Financial Instrument 
for the Environment).
Monitoring: Regular examination of the resources, outputs and results of 
interventions.
Output: Something that is produced with the resources allocated to an 
intervention.
Project replication: The reproduction of the whole project or parts of it.
Project results dissemination: The process of making the results and 
deliverables of a project available to the stakeholders and to the wider 
audience. 
Project sustainability: The continued existence of the project.
Results: The direct effects or changes that arise due to the intervention.
Thematic strategies: The 6th EAP introduced the Thematic Strategies as an 
instrument for its implementation and covered seven thematic areas: soil 
protection; protection and conservation of the marine environment; sustainable 
use of pesticides; air pollution; improving the quality of the urban environment; 
the sustainable use and management of natural resources and waste 
prevention and recycling.
These strategies are based on a global approach, by theme, rather than on 
certain pollutants or types of economic activity, as had been the case in the 
past. They set long-term objectives and provide an opportunity to simplify and 
clarify existing legislation.


EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
I. The EU’s environmental policy is integrated across the EU’s main policy 
areas. The vast majority of EU funding for the environment is therefore 
delivered as part of the EU’s main spending policies, such as the structural 
funds and the common agricultural policy. LIFE (L’Instrument Financier pour 
l’Environnement) is directly managed by the Commission. It is now in its fourth 
programming period and the current LIFE programme has an average annual 
budget of 239 million euro for financing projects – which represents less than 
1,5 % of estimated overall environmental related expenditure by the EU. This is 
a modest budget for an ambitious objective: to contribute to the development, 
updating and implementation of EU environmental policy and legislation. 
Almost 50 % of this budget, or 120 million euro, is devoted to the LIFE 
Environment component.
II. The Commission has proposed to increase the available budget for the LIFE 
Environment component in the next programming period. The Court therefore 
carried out an audit to assess the effectiveness of the LIFE Environment 
component of the LIFE programme. This involved an examination of whether 
the design and implementation of the LIFE Environment component contributed 
to programme effectiveness.
III. The Court found that overall, the LIFE Environment component was not 
operating effectively because it was not sufficiently well designed and 
implemented. The main design problems were:
(a)	The lack of a mechanism to target scarce resources on pre-selected 
objectives dissipated the impact of the invested funds. 
(b)	The indicative national allocations hampered the selection of best projects 
because projects were not only selected based on their merit but also on 
their Member State of origin. 
(c)	The quality of the project selection was adversely influenced by the 
insufficient justification of evaluation results.
(d)	The monitoring framework of the programme lacked appropriate common 
output and result indicators. This prevented the Commission from getting a 
comprehensive and updated overview of the performance of projects, and 
therefore from estimating the operational effectiveness of the programme.  
IV. The main implementation problems that hampered effectiveness were:
(a)	Key aspects of LIFE projects, concerning their innovative and demonstrative 
character, their sustainability prospects and EU interest, were not always 
appropriately assessed during project selection.
(b)	The monitoring  of the reasonableness of project costs, their sustainability 
and replication was insufficient.
(c)	The expected role of the component as a catalyst for environmental policy 
was greatly reduced due to insufficiently effective dissemination and low 
sustainability and replication of projects. 
V. The Court recommends that the Commission implements the following 
recommendations: 
1.	In the establishment of the multi-annual work programmes foreseen 
in the new LIFE programme, the legislative authorities should enable 
the Commission and the Member States to restrict eligible 
applications to limited strategic priorities, and to set clear, specific, 
measurable and achievable objectives for projects to be funded. A 
limited number of priorities fixed for a number of years would 
streamline the selection process, concentrate the efforts on specific 
issues and facilitate the evaluation of the programme impact.
2.	The Commission’s proposal for the new LIFE programme ends the 
national allocation for traditional projects but keeps a geographical 
balance for Integrated projects. In its application, the Commission 
should ensure that Integrated projects are selected based on their 
merit, and that geographical balance should not breach the principle 
of equal opportunities for applicants.
3.	The Commission should improve the project selection evaluation 
forms and require the evaluators to provide separate assessments 
and scores for major project aspects (such as innovative or 
demonstrative character of the proposal, the quality of the 
dissemination actions planned, or the potential for the replication of 
results), in order to improve the quality and transparency of the 
selection process and to ensure that selected projects have the 
potential to contribute most towards the achievement of the 
programme objectives.
4.	The Commission should improve its programme management tools 
and consider introducing adequate common output and result 
indicators as well as follow-up information at project level, in order to 
facilitate an appropriate monitoring of the programme. To the extent 
possible, such indicators should be relevant, accepted, credible, easy 
and robust (“RACER” criteria).
5.	The Commission should improve its assessment of the 
reasonableness of claimed personnel costs, particularly for 
comparable projects, by making better use of information collected 
during the monitoring phase. This could then be better used to 
facilitate the identification of excessive costs. 
6.	The Commission should require the monitoring team to include in its 
assessments a critical analysis of the dissemination, sustainability 
and replication measures proposed by the beneficiary and of the 
potential barriers that might hinder them, both in its evaluation 
reports during the project implementation as well as in its ex-post 
visit reports.
7.	The Commission should consider how to better encourage the 
dissemination and replication of project results by private 
beneficiaries who wish to protect their commercial interests.
8.	The Commission should consider how to require the beneficiaries to 
electronically submit simple and updated information after the project 
completion (i.e. whether the project remains operational, whether the 
project is replicated, and if yes, how many times, ...). This would 
enable the Commission to efficiently improve its ex-post information 
on programme effectiveness.


INTRODUCTION
Funding the environment in the EU 
1.	The environment is an increasingly important policy area for the European 
Union. With the Treaty of Amsterdam (1999), the Union recognised that the 
environment needed to be integrated, in terms of both definition and 
implementation, into all its other policies (e.g. Transport, Enterprise, Research 
and Enlargement). Due to the cross-cutting nature of environmental issues, the 
main Community expenditure programmes (in particular the Structural Funds, 
the Cohesion Fund and Agricultural expenditure, and other assistance 
programmes implemented outside the EU) include aspects related to 
environmental policy. 
2.	Figure 1 shows the estimated environment related expenditure for the 
period 2007 to 2013 by expenditure programme. The LIFE programme, with a 
budget of 2,1 billion euro, represents less than 1,5 % of total environmental 
related expenditure. 
Figure 1 – Estimated environmental expenditure (billion euro), 2007-2013 
 
Source: Combined Impact Assessment and Ex-Ante Evaluation of the Review of the 
LIFE+ Regulation: Options Development. 

The LIFE Programme
3.	The current LIFE programme  covers the period from 2007 to 2013 and has 
three components: 
(a)	LIFE Nature and Biodiversity, which co-finances best practice or 
demonstration projects that contribute to the implementation of the Birds 
and Habitats Directives, the Natura 2000 network. In addition it co-finances 
innovative or demonstration projects that contribute to the implementation 
of the objectives of the Commission's Communication on “Halting the loss 
of biodiversity by 2010 and beyond”. 
(b)	LIFE Environmental Policy and Governance (hereafter LIFE Environment), 
which co-finances innovative or demonstrative projects related to climate 
change, water, air, soil, urban environment, noise, chemicals, environment 
and health, natural resources and waste, forests and innovation.
(c)	LIFE Information and Communication, which supports projects that 
disseminate environmental information, such as information about climate 
change or nature conservation, networking or best-practice platforms.
4.	LIFE is directly managed by the Commission . Given that most of the EU 
environmental expenditure is integrated into other expenditure programmes, 
LIFE stands as the environmental backbone of the EU. Its overall objective is to 
contribute to the development, updating and implementation of EU 
environmental policy and legislation, including the integration of the 
environment into other policies. It should therefore serve as a platform for 
developing and exchanging best practices and for sharing knowledge, to 
catalyse and accelerate change on environmental and climate issues. In 
practice, LIFE supports the general (political) environmental priorities set by the 
Council and the European Parliament in the Environment Action Programmes 
(EAP). LIFE Environment projects cover a very wide range of sectors, including 
climate change, chemicals, water and natural resources, as outlined in Box 1. 
5.	The current LIFE Environment component has an average annual budget of 
some 119,5 million euro. From 1996 until 2012 this component provided 
1,3 billion euro to 1 730 projects (see Table 1). The LIFE Environment 
component is presented in Figure 2. It shows the intervention logic underlying 
the component and the interplay between its main elements: “policy setting and 
evaluation”, “project implementation” and “results and impact”.
6.	As a result of the relatively limited budget of the LIFE Environment 
component, both compared with its extensive objectives and overall EU 
environmental spending, its effectiveness is strongly determined by whether 
funded projects serve as catalysts for environmental change. This means that 
the successful completion of a project is not by itself enough to ensure the 
overall effectiveness of the programme. Indeed, if the projects do not address 
problems with significant importance at European level and their results are not 
adequately monitored, disseminated, sustained and replicated, the overall 
objective of contributing to environmental policy is unlikely to be achieved. 


Figure 2 – The LIFE Environment Component
 


AUDIT SCOPE AND APPROACH
7.	The Court identified a number of risks to the effectiveness of the LIFE 
Environment component of the programme in achieving its objectives. In 
particular, the risks that the combination of a high number of priority actions 
and the relatively low budget could lead to a lack of focus and inconclusive 
results, the weaknesses in the project monitoring and evaluation systems for 
drawing conclusions about the programme and the lack of a multiplier effect 
due to the insufficient dissemination of project results. Given the Commission’s 
intention to significantly increase the programme’s budget for the next 
programming period 2014-2020, the Court decided to carry out an audit in 
order to assess these risks in more detail. 
8.	The objective of the audit was to answer the question “Does the LIFE 
Environment component of the LIFE programme  operate effectively?”. This 
was done by addressing the following audit sub-questions: 
-	Was the LIFE Environment programme well designed in order to facilitate 
effective results? In order to answer this question, the Court examined the 
consistency of objectives with the available budget, how the budget was 
allocated and the design of the project selection and monitoring processes.
-	Was the LIFE Environment programme well implemented in order to obtain 
effective results? In order to answer this question, the Court examined the 
application of the selection criteria, and the monitoring, dissemination, 
sustainability and replication of projects.  
9.	The above questions consider the criteria necessary to achieve the catalytic 
effect and thus the overall effectiveness of the Environment component of the 
programme.
10.	The audit focused on the projects funded between 2005 and 2010. The 
Court visited the Commission’s relevant services and five Member States from 
among the largest beneficiaries of LIFE (Germany, Spain, France, Italy and the 
United Kingdom), representing 55 % of the LIFE budget and 15 % of its 
projects. 
11.	In total 25 projects were visited on-the-spot in the five Member States . 
Relevant documents were examined to check the purpose, eligibility, existence, 
sustainability and potential replication of the projects, and to verify whether best 
practices and lessons learned were appropriately disseminated by the 
Commission. In addition, relevant information related to project selection and 
monitoring, as well as information on the project websites was analysed for a 
sample of 70 projects.
12.	Interviews were carried out with representatives of the Commission, the 
evaluation team, the monitoring team  and representatives of the national or 
regional authorities acting as national or regional contact points (NCP). 
OBSERVATIONS
Part I – Design 
The large number of objectives of the programme was not consistent with 
the limited available budget
13.	In order to be effective, programmes should not only define clear and 
specific objectives, but these should be realistic and consistent with the 
allocated budget. More concretely, programmes should include a limited 
number of defined specific priorities in order to target available resources on 
attaining the objectives set. This is particularly important for LIFE, given its 
expected catalytic role to promote developments in the EU environmental 
policy and its relatively limited budget.
14.	The LIFE Regulation set many eligible objectives for LIFE Environment 
component projects (see Box 1). From 2008, the Commission narrowed down 
these objectives in its annual call for proposals into “indicative priority areas”. 
However, in practice this did not result in much greater targeting of specific 
priorities because proposals outside these priorities are eligible for funding, as 
long as they relate to any of the many objectives under the Regulation. 
Therefore despite its modest budget, LIFE Environment funds projects across 
twelve different policy areas and involving very different issues and interests. 
Even if good projects are being financed, this inevitably translates into a lack of 
critical mass of projects to promote meaningful developments in EU 
environmental policy and prevents any real impact on policy areas.
Box 1 – LIFE Environment: A small budget …
The LIFE Environment component represents around 0,5 % of the estimated EU 
environmental expenditure for the period 2007-2013. 
But with many ambitious objectives (listed in Annex II of LIFE+ Regulation)
(a) Climate change: to stabilise greenhouse gas concentration at a level that prevents 
global warming above 2°C.
(b) Water: to contribute to enhanced water quality by developing cost-effective 
measures to achieve a good ecological status in view of developing the first river basin 
management plan under Directive 2000/60/EC  by 2009.
(c) Air: to achieve levels of air quality that do not give rise to significant negative 
impacts on and risks to human health and the environment.
(d) Soil: to protect and to ensure the sustainable use of soil by preserving soil 
functions, preventing threats to soil, mitigating their effects and restoring degraded 
soils.
(e) Urban environment: to contribute to improving the environmental performance of 
Europe’s urban areas.
(f) Noise: to contribute to policy development and implementation on environmental 
noise.
(g) Chemicals: to improve the protection of the environment and health from risks 
posed by chemicals by 2020 by implementing chemicals legislation.
(h) Environment and health: to develop the information base for policy on the 
environment and health (the Environment and Health Action Plan 2004-2010).
(i) Natural resources and waste: (a) to develop and implement policies designed to 
ensure sustainable management and use of natural resources and waste, and to 
improve the environmental performance of products, sustainable production and 
consumption patterns, waste prevention, recovery and recycling; (b) to contribute to 
the effective implementation of the Thematic Strategy on the prevention and recycling 
of waste.
(j) Forests: to provide, especially through an EU coordination network, a concise and 
comprehensive basis for policy relevant information on forests in relation to climate 
change (impact on forest ecosystems, mitigation, substitution effects), biodiversity 
(baseline information and protected forest areas), forest fires, forest conditions and the 
protective functions of forests (water, soil and infrastructure) as well as contributing to 
the protection of forests against fires.
(k) Innovation: to contribute to developing and demonstrating innovative policy 
approaches technologies, methods and instruments to assist in the implementation of 
the Environmental Technologies Action Plan (ETAP).
15.	Table 1 shows the amounts that LIFE Environment spent by priority area in 
the years 1996 to 2012. Even within the priority areas, the projects cover a 
wide range of sectors and the total amount involved represents around 0,5 % of 
total EU environmental related expenditure (see paragraph 5).
Table 1 – LIFE Environment (1996-2012): number of projects and amount 
funded by priority area 
 
Source: Mid-Term Evaluation of the Implementation of the LIFE+ Regulation. GHK 
April 2010 and Commission services.
16.	Consequently, the fact that the LIFE programme does not have a 
mechanism to allocate its limited resources to the indicative favoured actions, 
prevents the Commission from focusing project applications on a limited 
number of specific priorities, which means that LIFE does not necessarily focus 
on pre-selected policy areas but funds the policy areas of the selected projects. 
In the Court’s view, this is not consistent with the catalytic role expected from 
the programme.
The national allocations hampered competition among project proposals
17.	LIFE funds cover a wide range of areas in the whole territory of the EU. In 
order to fund the best possible projects, applications should go through a 
competitive selection process whereby the best projects are selected for 
funding. 
18.	Since 2007 the LIFE programme has been designed to provide a 
proportionate distribution of projects among the Member States. Article 6(2) of 
the LIFE+ Regulation establishes indicative national allocations , based on 
population and on the percentage of the national territory designated as a 
Natura 2000 area. 
19.	The indicative national allocations intend to secure funding for smaller 
Member States by “blocking” a part of the budget for them. But as highlighted in 
the impact assessment supporting the Commission’s proposal for the new LIFE 
Regulation, their allocations are by definition small and this reduces their 
interest and commitment to the programme. As a result, the system did not 
stimulate more applications from these Member States. 
20.	Furthermore, the Court found that the national allocations distort the results 
of the evaluation criteria used for the selection process and can result in 
projects, depending on their Member State of origin, being selected with lower 
evaluation scores than rejected projects from other Member States. For 
example, in 2009 three projects from Italy, Poland and Finland, with a final 
score of 55 points were refused for co-financing while one French project with 
only 46 points and two British projects with 50 points were retained.
21.	The system magnifies competition between projects in the same country, 
rather than ensuring the best projects are selected at European level. The 
European added value of the programme is therefore reduced.
The templates used to evaluate project proposals did not require enough 
justification of the evaluation results, which undermined transparency in 
the selection process
22.	The project selection process is a cornerstone for the quality of spending 
programmes and a necessary condition for their effectiveness. This process 
should ensure transparency and equal opportunities for all applicants, be based 
on objective criteria and target projects that contribute most towards the 
achievement of the programme objectives. A transparent and effective 
selection process requires evaluation forms that reveal the score given to each 
of the criteria and their justification.
23.	LIFE projects are selected on the basis of a call for proposals launched 
every year by the Commission. While the Commission receives assistance 
from a consortium of external evaluators to evaluate project proposals, it 
remains responsible for the selection process. 
24.	The overall selection process of LIFE Environment proposals takes place in 
four phases: Eligibility, Selection, Award and Revision. The process is outlined 
in Annex I. For the two first phases of the evaluation process – eligibility and 
selection – each proposal is examined by one evaluator. In the award phase, 
the proposals have to be assessed independently by two expert evaluators. In 
case of significant divergence, a third assessment of the proposal is required. 
The final decision on the score to be given to each proposal is taken during a 
meeting chaired by the Commission’s services and attended by the evaluators. 
25.	The evaluators use standard templates, prepared by the Commission, to 
appraise project proposals on the basis of pre-defined selection criteria. Each 
of these criteria is further developed into a series of more specific aspects to be 
considered . While for the award phase the templates require the evaluators to 
score and give opinions in favour and against each major criterion, there is no 
requirement to justify the assessment or to score the different aspects included 
in each major criterion. 
26.	The audit found that key aspects for the effectiveness of the programme, 
such as the innovative or demonstrative character of the proposal, the quality of 
the dissemination actions planned, or the potential for the replication of results 
were not considered as standalone evaluation criteria, but as one among the 
several aspects inside the evaluation criteria. In practice this meant that the 
evaluators were not required to score and justify their assessment of these key 
aspects of LIFE Environment projects. In the Court’s view, this represents a 
weakness in the design of the project selection system .
27.	In fact, the Court found that the aggregation of different key aspects under 
the same evaluation criterion, without requiring the evaluator to give an 
individual score led to situations where the scores given were not sufficiently 
justified in the evaluation templates (see Box 2) or where important aspects 
were not appropriately assessed (see Box 3 and paragraph 41)
Box 2 – Evaluation score not sufficiently justified
A German proposal received predominantly negative comments concerning the 
evaluation criterion 1. Under this criterion the evaluators should assess the innovative 
nature of the proposal, the significance of the expected environmental progress and its 
technical feasibility.
The evaluator noted in the evaluation form that the only innovative character resided in 
the process not in the methods and concepts.
The evaluator scored this criterion with 6 points out of a maximum of 10. In the Court’s 
view, the negative narrative assessment provided in the evaluation form does not 
justify this score. 

28.	Furthermore, providing an overall score to an evaluation criterion without 
scoring the underlying aspects prevents an objective and thorough re-
performance of the evaluation work carried out. This undermines transparency 
of the programme’s selection system. 
The monitoring framework was not appropriate and this hampered 
efficient programme management
29.	Appropriate management of any kind of programme requires a regular 
examination of inputs, outputs and results, in order to obtain up to date 
information on whether the programme is progressing as intended, in other 
words, a monitoring framework. Monitoring informs managers during 
programme implementation about the achievement of operational objectives, 
so that problems can be identified and corrected in a timely manner.  A sound 
monitoring framework should contain, for example, a set of common input, 
output and result indicators. These should allow data at project level to be 
aggregated at programme level and to be compared against pre-defined 
objectives and targets. 
30.	Monitoring should not stop when projects are completed. In the LIFE 
programme, ex-post monitoring would be useful to determine whether or not 
the outputs and expected results continue to be generated, to check that there 
are no sustainability-related problems, or the extent to which project results 
have been transferred or replicated elsewhere.
31.	The Commission monitors project implementation, assisted by a consortium 
of experts acting as an external monitoring team. The team makes annual site 
visits to inspect the project progress, either alone or with a desk officer from the 
Commission. The monitoring team assesses the regular reports of project 
implementation, which the beneficiary submits to the Commission.
32.	During their project visits the monitoring team assesses the delivery of 
outputs and the achievement of results as stated in the project proposals, and 
assesses the technical and financial eligibility of the costs declared. At the end 
of the project, the monitoring experts complete an overall evaluation of the 
project’s results, including a final “score”. However, these monitoring 
arrangements focused at project level are of little use to draw lessons on the 
performance of the programme. This is because the programme’s performance 
monitoring framework does not have adequate common output and result 
indicators. In particular, the set of common output indicators introduced in 2007 
is largely limited to communication and dissemination actions such as 
workshops, seminars, conferences and publications. Furthermore, the 
Commission has not defined any result indicator. Consequently, the current 
framework does not allow the information from individual project results to be 
aggregated in a meaningful way. This prevents the regular monitoring of the 
programme’s effectiveness and the timely identification of problems affecting its 
performance.
33.	The overall objective of the programme is to contribute to the development, 
updating and implementation of EU environmental policy and legislation. That 
requires that successful projects are sustained, their results disseminated and 
ultimately replicated. However, once the projects are closed, the Commission 
considers that its available resources do not allow it to perform systematic ex-
post visits to follow-up the “after-LIFE” evolution of the projects. 
34.	Aware of these weaknesses, the Commission has, since 2009, included in 
the contract between the European Commission and the monitoring team a 
requirement for ten ex-post visits per year, to examine sustainability and other 
issues . By December 2012, 30 LIFE Environment projects had been visited. 
Although this represents an improvement, it represents only 5 % of closed 
projects.
35.	When evaluating the final project report, the monitoring team establishes a 
set of long term monitoring indicators to be used during ex-post visits. 
However, the audit has not found any evidence that these indicators are 
assessed in subsequent ex-post visits. Moreover, the proposed long term 
indicators are unique to each project, which would limit their usefulness, even if 
a value would be available, at programme level. A further weakness in the 
recently introduced ex-post checks is that, even if a project’s sustainability is 
comprehensively analysed by the ex-post evaluations, the monitoring team is 
not asked to analyse the project's replication, which is fundamental to achieving 
the catalytic effect of the programme.
36.	Furthermore, as is the case during the implementation of the projects,  
neither the Commission nor the monitoring team have considered preparing a 
list of common indicators to be used by the monitoring team during the ex-post 
visits in order to follow-up the outcomes of the LIFE Environment projects. The 
combination of the above weaknesses means that the Commission lacks 
information on the number of successfully completed projects, the number of 
projects that are still operational after a certain number of years, and the 
number of projects that have been replicated. This prevents the opportunity to 
benefit from lessons learned in the past and thereby improve selection and 
monitoring procedures, avoid the repetition of errors and save resources.
37.	Although the Commission organises periodic evaluations of the programme, 
these cannot replace day to day monitoring of the programme. In fact, both 
processes are complementary, since evaluations should use, among other 
sources, the information produced for monitoring. 
38.	Overall, the audit found that the lack of consolidated information and 
appropriate indicators regarding the outputs and results of the LIFE 
Environment projects prevents the ongoing assessment of the effectiveness of 
the programme and hinders the timely identification of problems affecting 
programme implementation, which in turns hinders learning lessons for the 
future. 
Part II – Implementation 
39.	Taking into account the objectives of the LIFE Environment component (see 
paragraph 4 and Box 1),  the eligibility criteria defined by the Regulation and 
the Commission’s selection guidelines, the Court has considered that to act as 
catalysts and contribute to an effective programme, LIFE Environment projects 
should: 
(a)	be Innovative or Demonstrative by focusing on innovative or demonstrative 
solutions to environmental problems by developing or disseminating 
innovative techniques or methods, best practice techniques, know-how, 
etc.;
(b)	be of EU interest and contribute to the achievement of the general 
objectives of EU environmental policy by targeting a problem with 
significant importance at European level or expecting to generate results 
that would be widely applicable;
(c)	have their results disseminated to ensure that innovative technologies and 
procedures for protecting the environment are well known and widely 
applied;
(d)	be sustainable as the continued existence of the project is required for its 
successful dissemination and replication;
(e)	be replicated by other entities in order to generate a wider impact. 
Replication may imply the propagation and multiplication of the outcomes 
of the project and the generation of impacts beyond the individual project.
40.	The audit analysed, therefore, how these criteria were met in the different 
implementation phases of LIFE projects. 
Key aspects of the projects were not always appropriately assessed 
during project selection 
41.	The Court reviewed the evaluation forms of the 25 projects visited and of 
70 additional projects subject to a desk review. More concretely, the Court 
reviewed whether the evaluation of project proposals appropriately covered 
certain essential aspects for the effectiveness of the programme, such as the 
project’s innovative or demonstrative character, potential for sustainability or 
replication, and significance of the environmental problem addressed (see 
paragraph 39). The audit revealed projects where the evaluation and key 
criteria scores awarded were not sufficiently justified (see paragraph 27), but 
which were nevertheless funded:
(a)	The assessment of the innovative and demonstrative character of projects 
was not sufficiently justified in 20 % of the projects that have been the 
subject of a desk review and in 24 % of the projects visited on the spot.
-	The Court’s visit to the 25 projects found cases (see example in Box 3) 
where the level of innovation was either overrated or insufficiently 
justified, for example, where the evaluators did not take into account the 
existence of similar projects.    
Box 3 – Selection procedure: example of weaknesses in the evaluation of 
innovative and demonstrative character 
In the evaluation of a UK project, the innovative character of the project was 
considered as high even if under other criteria the evaluator stated that “the method is 
not entirely innovative in the Community”. 
When evaluating the demonstration character of the project, the evaluator questioned 
the scale of the project, as being too large. The beneficiary’s reply was that the 
technology proposed had already been tested on two smaller facilities of the company.
The audit revealed that one of these two facilities was already operating at a 
production scale, which questions the demonstrative character of the LIFE project.
(b)	The assessment of project sustainability or replication prospects was not 
sufficiently justified in 21 % of the projects that have been the subject of a 
desk review and in 12 % of the projects visited on the spot. 
-	The Court’s visit to the 25 projects found cases (see examples in Box 4) 
where evaluators did not identify the potential economic, financial or 
legal barriers that could prevent the project from being sustained or 
replicated. Indeed, the audit found cases of projects that, while 
achieving their objectives and expected results, could not be sustained 
or replicated because of these barriers , which in the Court’s view, 
could have been identified already during the selection process. Had 
these barriers been identified by the evaluators, the Commission could 
have decided not to fund the project. 
Box 4 – Selection procedure: examples of weaknesses in the evaluation of 
sustainability and replication of the project proposals
Project Sustainability prospects
In the evaluation of a Spanish proposal, the evaluators noted that there were no 
commercial plans to maintain the project and therefore they could not assess whether 
the project would be economically viable after completion and receipt of EU funding. 
However, the evaluators did not request any modifications or additional information in 
the revision of the project to ensure that the project offered the minimum guarantees of 
sustainability beyond EU funding. The evaluation of sustainability was therefore 
insufficient. 
The auditors’ visit of the project confirmed that the project was not sustained after its 
completion.
Legal barrier to project replication 
Another project in Spain, which has been completed in 2008, developed a technique 
using ozone as an alternative environmentally-friendly cleaning agent in food-
processing plants. The spreading of this technology would depend on a new European 
legislation supporting this technology, which is still not in place. 
Economic barriers to project replication
A project in France reduced the environmental impact of glass production. However, 
the long life-span of the glass furnaces (15-20 years) limits the possibility for 
replication within the beneficiary’s group of companies. Replication outside the group 
is not envisaged as the project represents an economic advantage for the group.

(c)	The assessment of EU interest was insufficiently justified in 20 % of the 
projects that have been the subject of a desk review and in 12 % of the 
projects visited on the spot. 
-	The Court’s visit to the 25 projects found cases (see example in Box 5) 
where the EU interest was either not assessed, or the assessment was 
not justified by the evaluator, for example, cases where there were 
doubts that the project results could be applied outside the immediate 
project scope. 
Box 5 – Selection procedure: example of weaknesses in the evaluation of the EU 
Interest of the project proposals
A UK proposal aimed at maintaining urban environments in three sites. In two of these, 
the proposal did not mention environmental issues. The main actions planned, and 
finally carried out, where related to the social environment, or to nature protection 
measures, rather than to address any environmental problem of significant importance 
at EU level as required by the applicable regulation.
Even if referring to one of the priorities defined in the LIFE Regulation, the proposal 
focused on very local problems and was not of EU interest.
The evaluation forms reviewed by the Court showed no evidence that this aspect had 
been assessed by the evaluator. 
The Commission’s monitoring of project implementation was insufficient 
in some respects
42.	The Court checked whether the monitoring work carried out was 
comprehensive and that the reports produced by the monitoring teams for the 
25 projects visited accurately reflected actual project implementation.  
43.	The work of the monitoring team during project implementation is focused 
on the delivery of the expected outputs and verifying that the claimed costs are 
technically justified, provided for in the project’s budget, realistic and actually 
incurred in the reporting period. The Court found that these checks are carried 
out regularly. However, the audit found problems with monitoring the 
reasonableness of costs and the sustainability and replication of projects.
44.	While the eligibility of claimed costs is checked, there is not any 
comparative analysis of the costs among similar projects, not even between 
projects in the same sector and region. The absence of such comparisons may 
lead to the acceptance of excessive costs, especially as the evaluators 
responsible for assessing the project proposals and the beneficiaries’ final 
reports are primarily technical, rather than financial experts. For example, the 
audit found that the claimed hourly staff cost of project managers for the 
23 closed projects visited varied between 10,56 euro and 164,39 euro.
45.	The analysis of the final cost structure of the 23 completed projects that 
were visited – shown in Figure 3 – indicate the importance of staff costs, which 
in the Court’s sample represented between 18,5 % to 83,5 % of the total costs 
of the project.
Figure 3 – Cost structure of the 23 completed projects
 
Source: European Court of Auditors.
46.	While there may be good reasons justifying the wide variations found in the 
hourly staff cost charged to LIFE projects, the Court nevertheless finds that 
extreme range variations justify further analysis by the Commission.
47.	The Court also found that the monitoring team does not pay sufficient 
attention to the sustainability and replication prospects of projects (see 
examples in Box 6). 
Box 6 – Examples of weaknesses in monitoring  of sustainability and replication
A project in Spain aimed at reducing groundwater contamination by reducing the use 
of fertilisers and nitric acid in a horticultural sector. 
The project received a good assessment from the monitoring team despite the fact 
that the beneficiary recognised that limited environmental benefits were obtained, and 
that further studies were needed to demonstrate environmental benefits. The 
monitoring team also noted that such studies were necessary to assure the project’s 
sustainability, although the beneficiary had not committed to undertake such studies. 
Finally, the transferability was assessed as “high” by the monitoring team, although the 
team concluded that “this sector was probably not ready to introduce technological 
changes because it has low profits and no investment can be really done by the small 
producers”. This issue was not addressed during the implementation of the project. 
At the time of the Court’s visit only one of the six partners which participated in the 
project continued using the new technology. There is no evidence that the project was 
replicated.
A project in Italy had an expected duration of 24 months. Five months before its end, 
the beneficiary requested a substantial project modification as none of the 50 potential 
users that were initially interested in product testing were still interested in the new 
process. Despite the fact such testing was initially considered as fundamental, the 
beneficiary requested the Commission’s permission to have the test performed by a 
business partner.
The Commission accepted the requested modification of the project. After its 
completion, the project was not sustained nor replicated due to the lack of interest of 
end users. Despite the evident risks that the lack of interest from end-users 
represented for the sustainability of the project, the monitoring team never questioned 
this issue and no corrective action was taken to address it.
48.	Beneficiaries prepare implementation and final reports where they present 
the project results and achievements. The monitoring teams assess these 
reports. The audit found that the monitoring teams were not sufficiently critical 
of the statements and arguments made in the beneficiaries’ implementation 
and final reports (see Box 7). As a result, there is a risk that the achievements 
of the projects, and thus of the programme are overestimated. 
Box 7 – Insufficiently critical monitoring of beneficiaries’ reports
A project in Italy aimed at the reduction of waste in the ceramics sector. The 
monitoring team’s assessment of the beneficiary’s final report substantially reflects the 
beneficiary’s own statements, and was not sufficiently critical of the project’s reported 
sustainability. The project which was finished in September 2008 (the final payment 
was done in August 2009), was not sustained at the time of the Court’s visit.
A project in Germany aimed at developing cleaner city logistics. The monitoring team’s 
evaluation of the project’s environmental benefits substantially reflects the 
beneficiary’s own statements, without further assessment.    
49.	In conclusion, the audit detected weaknesses in the assessments by the 
monitoring teams in 18 out of 25 projects examined. In addition to the lack of a 
sufficiently critical assessment of beneficiaries’ own assessments, the 
weaknesses were evenly spread over the assessment of the projects’ 
environmental objectives, sustainability, replication and dissemination. 
Low dissemination, sustainability, and replication of projects jeopardised 
the “catalytic” role expected from the programme
50.	One of the LIFE programme’s key objectives is that it should act as a 
catalyst for developing environmental policy and actions. A necessary condition 
for this is that projects’ results are appropriately and widely disseminated, 
sustained and replicated (see paragraph 39). 
51.	The sample of projects audited point to problems with all of these elements 
(see Annex II). Even when projects achieved positive environmental results, 
the programme failed to effectively disseminate and replicate them effectively in 
order to translate those small scale results into a more meaningful application 
at EU level. This significantly limits the overall effectiveness of the programme.
Dissemination of results 
52.	As indicated in paragraph 39 and Figure 2, the dissemination of project 
results is required if projects are to serve as catalysts for environmental action. 
Effective dissemination encourages the replication and development of project 
results. It should be well targeted, efficiently delivered, and monitored. The 
responsibility for disseminating LIFE project results is shared between the 
Commission and the beneficiaries. The audit found problems with both. 
53.	The Commission publishes significant LIFE project information on its 
website. This includes summaries of project themes and lessons learned, a 
project database, a “LIFE by Theme” tool, and project summaries. Thematic 
platform meetings are promoted by the Commission or by Member States or 
individual beneficiaries, and closing conferences are organised by a significant 
number of projects.
54.	However, once projects are completed, no update is made by the 
Commission to reflect either problems or successes concerning the results, 
sustainability or replication of the projects. Moreover, the partially manual 
treatment of the information, and the lack of Commission resources lead to 
information gaps and errors. For example, 11 out of the 23 closed projects 
visited were not included by the Commission in the “LIFE by Theme” tool. This 
means that, despite extensive on line information, potential users do not have 
access to complete and up to date project information.
55.	The LIFE Common Provisions require the beneficiary, as part of the 
communication actions, to create or use an existing website for the 
dissemination of project activities, progress and results. For LIFE projects 
approved before 2007 there was no mandatory period for keeping the site 
operational. For sixteen  out of 22 of these closed projects that were visited by 
the audit, the website was operational. For LIFE projects approved from 2007 
the website has to be online within six months after the start of the project and 
has to be regularly updated and maintained for at least five years after the end 
of the project. The projects audited from this period complied with this 
requirement. 
56.	Although the Commission has made efforts to stimulate improvements in 
project websites (such as posting examples of websites on the LIFE website 
and providing recommendations on how to design LIFE project websites given 
to the selected projects), the audit found weaknesses in the websites reviewed.
57.	The audit analysed the content of 63 project websites  from the sample of 
69  projects. This included 31 LIFE projects approved before 2007, and 
32 LIFE projects approved thereafter. Of the 53 operational websites that were 
operational at the time of the audit, 11 had very limited content. The main 
weaknesses were very brief project descriptions, and lack of visual aids, 
reports, and presentations. However there was an improvement in the quality of 
the websites of projects approved after 2007.
58.	In addition to passive communication using the internet or other forms of 
publicity, dissemination activities should be tailored to the specific 
circumstances of the project. The audit found cases where, despite projects 
delivering their intended results, dissemination activities were ineffective and 
failed to encourage project replication. Project websites were not updated, 
dissemination was largely in the context of the beneficiaries’ commercial 
advertising campaigns, or to direct business partners and activities planned as 
part of agreed “after-LIFE” communication plans were not completed.  
59.	For project beneficiaries which are private companies, dissemination 
activities are generally organised in the context of the commercialisation of the 
product. This was done to protect know-how as the project was often 
considered as a strategic advantage for the beneficiary companies. However, 
this limits the effectiveness of the dissemination pursued by the programme. 
LIFE results would give the company a competitive advantage in the industry. 
Therefore, it may not be in the interests of the company to transfer the 
knowledge and replicate the project out of the group to which it belongs. This 
significantly reduces the eventual environmental impact of the project. The 
question arises as to whether the LIFE programme should fund such projects.
60.	In conclusion, the Court found that the dissemination activities undertaken 
did not sufficiently encourage the replication of project results. Even when 
beneficiaries completed the dissemination activities required under the project 
agreement, there was a lack of coordinated dissemination activities between 
the Commission, beneficiaries, and competent national authorities to effectively 
encourage replication of project results.
61.	 Box 8 gives such an example of a successful project, whose potential for 
significant environmental impact was not achieved due to ineffective 
dissemination.  
Box 8 – Catalytic impact for the ceramic sector not achieved
The polishing of ceramic and related materials produces large quantities of waste. One 
of the projects visited in Italy successfully implemented a process to reduce and 
recycle this waste. 
The project, finished in 2008, was still operational at the time of the audit visit in 2013. 
Despite the success and sustainability of the project it has not been replicated. The 
project’s website has not been updated since its completion but the company, 
considering the project as a very positive marketing aspect, includes the LIFE logo in 
all its promotional items.
An important part of this production is concentrated in a limited number of European 
regions, in particular the ceramic district of Sassuolo in Italy and the Valencia region in 
Spain.
Although the beneficiary completed the dissemination activities required under the 
project agreement, there has not been a coordinated effort between the Commission, 
the regional authorities and the business organisations to disseminate project results 
and encourage the use of similar techniques elsewhere. The environmental impact is 
therefore significantly reduced.
Project sustainability and replication of results
62.	As indicated in paragraph 39, the sustainability of LIFE Environment 
projects is essential for the programme’s effectiveness, although to some 
extent the innovative and demonstrative character required for LIFE projects 
implies a risk of failure. The audit visited 23 completed projects, most of them 
completed between 2007 and 2009. The audit found that ten out of these were 
no longer operational at the time of the visit. For two projects, beneficiaries or 
partners were conducting new developments. Examples of unsustainable 
projects were given in Boxes 4 and 6, and an example of a sustainable project 
was given in Box 8. 
63.	The weaknesses in the dissemination of successful project results explain, 
at least partially the low replication of projects. Only eight of the 23 completed 
projects visited have been or are likely to be replicated, including three that are 
no longer operational. For two projects out of the eight, replication is done 
within the group of companies to which the beneficiary belongs, limiting the 
replication and EU added value. This demonstrates the difference between 
successful project completion, and programme effectiveness.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
64.	The LIFE Environment programme should serve as a catalyst for EU 
environmental policy, essentially through the funding of innovative or 
demonstrative projects with European added value and the subsequent 
dissemination and replication of their results. The audit assessed the 
effectiveness of this catalytic effect.
65.	The Court concluded that the LIFE Environment component was not 
operating effectively because it was not sufficiently well designed and 
implemented. The audit identified design and implementation weaknesses, 
which significantly reduced the programme’s fundamental catalytic role to boost 
meaningful developments in EU environmental policy. Without this, the overall 
effectiveness of the programme cannot be achieved. 
66.	The lack of a mechanism to target scarce resources on pre-selected 
objectives dissipated the impact of the invested funds (paragraphs 13 to 16).

Recommendation 1
In the establishment of the multi-annual work programmes foreseen in the new LIFE 
programme, the legislative authorities should enable the Commission and the Member 
States to restrict eligible applications to limited strategic priorities, and to set clear, 
specific, measurable and achievable objectives for projects to be funded. 
A limited number of priorities fixed for a number of years would streamline the 
selection process, concentrate the efforts on specific issues and facilitate the 
evaluation of the programme impact.
67.	The indicative national allocations hampered the selection of best projects 
because projects were not only selected based on their merit but also on their 
Member State of origin (paragraphs 17 to 21).
Recommendation 2 
The Commission’s proposal for the new LIFE programme ends the national allocation 
for traditional projects but keeps a geographical balance for Integrated projects. In its 
application, the Commission should ensure that Integrated projects are selected based 
on their merit, and that geographical balance should not breach the principle of equal 
opportunities for applicants.
68.	The quality of the project selection was adversely influenced by the 
inappropriate justification of evaluation results (paragraphs 22 to 28).
Recommendation 3
The Commission should improve the project selection evaluation forms and require the 
evaluators to provide separate assessments and scores for major project aspects 
(such as innovative or demonstrative character of the proposal, the quality of the 
dissemination actions planned, or the potential for the replication of results), in order to 
improve the quality and transparency of the selection process and to ensure that 
selected projects have the potential to contribute most towards the achievement of the 
programme objectives.
69.	The monitoring framework of the programme lacked appropriate common 
output and result indicators. This prevented the Commission from getting a 
comprehensive and updated overview of the performance of projects, and 
therefore from getting information on the effectiveness of the programme 
(paragraphs 29 to 38).
Recommendation 4
The Commission should improve its programme management tools and consider 
introducing adequate common output and result indicators as well as follow-up 
information at project level, in order to facilitate an appropriate monitoring of the 
programme. To the extent possible, such indicators should be relevant, accepted, 
credible, easy and robust (“RACER” criteria). 
70.	Key aspects of the projects, concerning their innovative and demonstrative 
character, their sustainability, and EU interest, were not appropriately assessed 
during project selection (paragraph 41) (see Recommendation 3).
71.	The monitoring of the reasonableness of project costs, their sustainability 
and replication were insufficient (paragraphs 42 to 49).
Recommendation 5
The Commission should improve its assessment of the reasonableness of claimed 
personnel costs, particularly for comparable projects, by making better use of 
information collected during the monitoring phase. This could then be better used to 
facilitate the identification of excessive costs. 
72.	The Court found examples of ineffective dissemination, low sustainability 
and replication of projects. The potential role of the Environment component as 
a catalyst for environmental policy was therefore greatly reduced 
(paragraphs 50 to 63).

Recommendation 6
The Commission should increase its focus on dissemination, sustainability and 
replication of LIFE projects. In particular, the Commission should:   
(a)	 Require the monitoring team to include in its assessments a critical analysis of the 
dissemination, sustainability and replication measures proposed by the beneficiary and 
of the potential barriers that might hinder them, both in its evaluation reports during the 
project implementation as well as in its ex-post visit reports. 
(b) Consider how to better encourage the dissemination and replication of project 
results by private beneficiaries who wish to protect their commercial interests.
(c) Consider how to require the beneficiaries to electronically submit simple and 
updated information after the project completion (i.e. whether the project remains 
operational, whether the project is replicated, and if yes, how many times, ...). This 
would enable the Commission to efficiently improve its ex-post information on the 
programme effectiveness.
This Report was adopted by Chamber I, headed by Mr Jan KINŠT, Member of 
the Court of Auditors, in Luxembourg at its meeting of 6 November 2013.
							 For the Court of Auditors

						   Vítor Manuel da SILVA CALDEIRA
								President



ANNEX I
The Selection Process
 



Annex II
ECA assessment of the sample of projects visited
 
 	The so called “LIFE+” Programme is governed by Regulation (EC) No 614/2007 
of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 May 2007 concerning the 
Financial Instrument for the Environment (LIFE+) (OJ L 149, 9.6.2007, p. 1). It is 
the successor to the LIFE I (1992-1995), LIFE II (1996-1999) and LIFE III (2000-
2006) programmes from previous periods. 
	The Commission has prepared a proposal for the new LIFE programme (2014-
2020) that is currently under negotiation in the European Parliament and the 
Council of the EU. 
 	Management by the European Commission (Directorate-General for the 
Environment) on a centralised basis.
 	The Nature and Biodiversity component was the subject of the Court’s Special 
Report No 11/2009 The sustainability and the Commission’s management of the 
LIFE-Nature projects.
 	Including 23 completed projects, in which 22 were selected in 2005 and 2006 and 
only three in 2007. It should be noted that some rules, for example those 
concerning dissemination of project results were made more stringent since 2007.
 	The Commission is assisted in the project selection procedure by external 
evaluators and in project monitoring by an external monitoring team.
  	Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 
23 October 2000 establishing a framework for Community action in the field of 
water policy (OJ L 327, 22.12.2000, p. 1).
  	The national allocations “not used” are re-allocated and used to co-finance 
projects submitted by other Member States.
 	Under the current programme the template for the award criterion for the 
European added value of the proposals includes inter alia the assessment of 
some aspects such as the innovative and demonstrative character of the project 
and that of the proposed action for dissemination of the results.
  	The ex-post evaluation of LIFE III (COWI 2009) and the Court’s Special Report 
No 11/2009 have already identified the need for further clarification of the scoring 
system.
 	Other projects are visited in the framework of the DG Environment annual audit 
plan. The audit visits are conducted just after the final payment, as the sample is 
drawn from projects for which the final payment was made the previous year, and 
shortly after the project conclusion. They are focused on financial aspects of the 
projects and are not considered to be a part of follow-up activities.
 	Typical barriers which were not sufficiently addressed by the monitoring team 
include: absence of market opportunities for the project outputs; problems with 
business continuity or access to financial resources of the beneficiary and 
legislative barriers.
 	Only one of the six projects without operational websites was still functioning.
 	Five projects had been abandoned and no website existed. One project never 
started.
 	The beneficiary of one project withdrew just after the selection. Another project 
from the reserve list replaced it.