Special Report No 15/2014
(pursuant to Article 287(4), second subparagraph, TFEU)


The External Borders Fund has fostered financial solidarity but requires better measurement of 
results and needs to provide further EU added value

together with the Commission's replies




	CONTENTS
	
	Paragraph
Glossary
Executive Summary	I	-	VI
Introduction	1	-	19
The External Borders Fund	1	-	10
The EBF in context	11	-	13
Roles and responsibilities	14	-	19
Audit scope and approach	20	-	24
Observations	25	-	74
The EBF has contributed to external border  
management, but the overall result could not be measured 
and low implementation in some Member States limits impact	26	-	29
Programmes and projects geared towards the EBF’s 
priorities but the overall result could not be measured	26	-	28
Low implementation in some Member States			29
Whilst the EBF has fostered financial solidarity, further EU  
added value has been limited	30	-	47
Partially ineffective system for reinforcing specific priorities	32	-	34
Little support of operational  
cooperation between Member States	35	-	40
EBF mechanism to address specific  
weaknesses at strategic border points and emergency mechanism 
were partially effective	41	-	44
Support for projects which would have  
been financed nationally in any case, lacking a proper  
needs assessment or containing significant ineligible costs	45	-	47
Strategic and operational weaknesses in EBF programming and 
implementation at Member State and Commission level	48	-	62
Programmes not embedded in national strategies for  
border control and visas …	49	-	51
… lacking SMART objectives and measurable indicators	52	-	55
Annual programming requirements leading to excessive  
administrative burden and implementation difficulties	56	-	57
Some Member State’s project selection procedures did not  
ensure that their actual needs are met	58	-	60
Inadequate procurement procedures in Member States 
putting sound financial management at risk	61	-	65
Weaknesses in Responsible Authorities’ monitoring and  
serious deficiencies in the ex post evaluations 
by the Commission and Members States do not allow an adequate 
assessment of the Funds’ overall  
achievements	66	-	74
Lack of adequate monitoring and reporting of projects  
by Member States	67	-	70
Delays and serious deficiencies in the ex post evaluations  
at both Member State and Commission level	71	-	74
Conclusions and recommendations	75	-	83
The EBF has contributed to external border  
management, but the overall result could not be measured 
 due to the lack of SMART objectives and serious 
 deficiencies in evaluation	76	-	78
The EBF has fostered financial solidarity but further EU added  
value has been limited	79	-	80
Strategic weaknesses in EBF programming 			81
Weaknesses in EBF implementation	82	-	83

Annex – Audited projects
Commission's replies


GLOSSARY
Annual Programme: A Member State’s work programme implementing its 
multi-annual programme.
Community Actions: EBF co-financed projects which support cooperation 
between Member States. Project themes are defined in the Commission’s 
Annual Work Programme and call for proposals. Community Actions are 
directly managed by the Commission and implemented by Member States.
Emergency Actions: EBF co-financed projects to support Member States in 
duly substantiated emergency situations requiring urgent action at external 
borders. Emergency Actions are directly managed by the Commission and 
implemented by Member States.
EMSA: The European Maritime Safety Agency supports the European 
Commission and Member States in the development and implementation of EU 
legislation on maritime safety, pollution by ships and maritime security. It has 
also been given operational tasks in the field of oil pollution response, vessel 
monitoring and in long range identification and tracking of vessels.
EU added value: the value which the EBF creates which is additional to that 
which would otherwise have been created by Member States acting alone. This 
includes financial solidarity whereby Member States who bear, for the benefit of 
the EU, a heavier financial burden receive more funding. EU added value is 
further generated by supporting specific EU priorities, cooperation between 
Member States or targeting the most urgent problems i.e. the most threatened 
border areas.
eu-LISA: European Agency for the operational management of large-scale IT 
systems in the area of freedom, security and justice.
EUROSUR: The European Border Surveillance System provides a platform for 
information exchange and cooperation between Member States' border control 
authorities as well as with Frontex. 
EUSatCen: The European Union Satellite Centre is an EU agency in the area 
of defence and security supporting decision-making of the European Union by 
providing analysis of satellite imagery and other data.
Frontex: European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at 
the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union. Frontex 
coordinates Member States operations at border areas under significant 
migratory pressure, performs risk analysis and supports border guard training.
DG Home Affairs: The Directorate-General (DG) of the European Commission 
in charge of the policy area known as ‘Home Affairs’ (DG HOME).
Internal Security Fund (ISF) Borders and Visas: The ISF Borders and Visas 
was established for the period 2014-2020 and incorporates the EBF. 
Management and Control System: Set of procedures and practical 
arrangements for a Member State to implement the SOLID Funds.
SMART objectives: Objectives which are SMART are Specific, Measurable, 
Achievable, Relevant and Timely.
Schengen acquis: the common set of Schengen rules to be applied by 
Schengen states including control at land, sea and air borders (airports), 
issuing of visas, police cooperation and protection of personal data.
Schengen area: An area consisting of 26 European countries that have 
abolished passport and immigration controls at their common borders. It 
consists of 22 EU Member States and the four member countries of the 
European Free Trade Association (EFTA).
Schengen Catalogue on External borders control, Return and 
readmission: Issued by the Council of the European Union, this contains 
recommendations and best practices in order to assist both Schengen Member 
States and Schengen Acceding States to apply the Schengen acquis correctly.
Schengen evaluations: Verifications carried out by the Council, checking 
whether the Schengen acquis is correctly applied. Following the adoption of 
Council Regulation (EU) No 1053/2013 of 7 October 2013 establishing an 
evaluation and monitoring mechanism to verify the application of the Schengen 
acquis, the Commission will henceforth take the lead role
Schengen Information System (SIS II): A large-scale IT system that is used 
by border guards as well as by police, customs, visa and judicial authorities 
throughout the Schengen Area to exchange data such as information on 
persons who may have been involved in a serious crime or may not have the 
right to enter or stay in the EU. 
SOLID programme: The “General programme on Solidarity and Management 
of Migration Flows for the period 2007-2013” consisting of four funds (European 
Fund for the Integration of Third-country Nationals, European Refugee Fund, 
European Return Fund and External Borders Fund). In this report the term 
“Fund” is used to refer to the External Borders Fund.
Specific Actions: Based on an Annual Work Programme and directly 
managed by the Commission, Specific Actions should contribute to the 
development of the European integrated border management system by 
addressing weaknesses at strategic border points identified in a Frontex risk 
analysis.
Visa Information System (VIS): A large-scale IT system that allows Schengen 
States to exchange visa data.



EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
I.	The External Borders Fund (EBF) is the main EU financial instrument in 
support of external border management, amounting to 1,9 billion euro for the 
2007-2013 period. The EBF’s overall aim is to help current and prospective 
Schengen States to ensure uniform, effective and efficient controls at their 
common external borders. 
II.	The Court’s audit focussed on processes related to the EBF’s effectiveness, 
EU added value and the achievement of the objectives of programmes and 
projects. It examined the design, programming and implementation as well as 
the monitoring and evaluation.
III.	The audit showed that the EBF has contributed to external border 
management and that it has fostered financial solidarity. However further EU 
added value was limited and the overall result could not be measured due to 
weaknesses in the Responsible Authorities’ monitoring and serious deficiencies 
in the ex post evaluations by the Commission and the Member States. 
IV.	Member States’ programmes were not embedded in national strategies for 
border control and visas and lacked SMART objectives and measurable 
indicators. Project selection procedures did not ensure that the actual needs of 
the Member States were met and inadequate procurement procedures in 
Member States put sound financial management at risk.
V.	The audit found serious weaknesses in management of the Fund in key 
Member States (Greece, Spain, Italy and, for the early funding years, Malta). 
Low implementation in some countries limited the Fund’s effectiveness. These 
weaknesses lead to the risk that border management is not adequately 
strengthened where it is most needed.
VI.	The Court focuses its recommendation in four areas:
(a)	Ensuring the availability of information on overall results
Member States should set measurable targets for output, outcome and, where 
possible, impact indicators and indicators should be recorded from the start of 
the programme using appropriate IT systems. The Commission should ensure 
that its evaluation report presents stakeholders with an informed and timely 
analysis of underlying data.
(b)	Increasing the EU added value of the Fund
The Commission should provide Frontex with relevant, comprehensive and 
timely information regarding implementation of the EBF, the Internal Security 
Fund and subsequent instruments. The recording of co-financed assets in 
Frontex’s equipment pool should be made obligatory for those assets which 
might be useful to its needs. Furthermore, Member States and the Commission 
should concentrate more on establishing Common Application Centres and 
other forms of consular cooperation rather than the renovation, adaptation or 
equipping of consulates. 
(c)	Embedding the EBF in a national strategy for border management
Member States should develop comprehensive national strategies on border 
management based on a risk analysis following the Common Integrated Risk 
Analysis Model and this should be an ex ante condition to receive support from 
the Internal Security Fund or subsequent instruments.
(d)	Strengthening the implementation of the Fund 
Administrative capacity, including in respect of procurement, should be 
strengthened, particularly in key Member States.


INTRODUCTION
The External Borders Fund
1.	The External Borders Fund (EBF) is the main European Union (EU) 
financial instrument in support of external border management, amounting to 
1,9 billion euro for the 2007-2013 period . Its overall aim is to help current and 
prospective Schengen States to ensure uniform, effective and efficient controls 
at the external borders of the Member States of the European Union. 
2.	Within the Schengen area, internal controls have been abolished with the 
consequence that external border security of any one state affects all of the 
others. Due to the countries’ differing geographical situations, the 
responsibilities for border controls vary considerably. The EBF aims to 
establish financial solidarity between Member States  by supporting those for 
which the control of the EU’s external borders represents a heavy burden.
3.	There are currently 28 Member States implementing the EBF (see 
Figure 1). All EU Member States except for the UK, Ireland and Croatia 
participate in the EBF .


Figure 1 ? Countries participating in the EBF
 
Source: European Court of Auditors.
4.	The general aims of the EBF are to support:
(a)	an efficient organisation of border controls,
(b)	an efficient management of the flows of persons at the external borders, in 
conformity with the Schengen acquis and the principles of respectful 
treatment and dignity,
(c)	a uniform application of the relevant EU legislation, and
(d)	the improvement of Member States’ consular services in third countries as 
regards the flows of third-country nationals into the territory of the Member 
States and the cooperation between Member States in this regard. 
5.	The EBF’s contribution to external border management is to be achieved by 
focussing on five priorities (Figure 2). These have been defined by the 
Commission in the “Strategic Guidelines” . Member States have to address at 
least three of them in their EBF multi-annual programmes. Within each of the 
five priorities, the Commission has identified a number of areas with particular 
importance to the EU (“specific priorities”) and for which the Member States 
can receive a higher EBF co-financing rate (see paragraph 9). 


Figure 2 ? EBF priorities and specific priorities

















Source: 	Based on Commission Decision 2007/599/EC.


6.	Expenditure by priority for 2007-2010 is shown in Figure 3. Based on the 
Member States’ plans for 2011-2013, the allocation for priority 1 is expected to 
increase to 37 % while the allocation for priority 2 is expected to decrease to 
36 %, the other priorities remaining stable. 
Figure 3 ? EBF expenditure annual programmes 2007–2010 per priority1
 
1 The latest available final expenditure data concern the annual programme 2010. Due 
to the 2,5 year eligibility period, funds from this annual programme could be spent up 
until the end of June 2012 and had to be subsequently verified by Member States and 
the Commission. Reports on later annual programmes have not been finalised yet.
Source: European Commission.
7.	The measures funded by the EBF include investment in infrastructure at 
border crossing points; purchase of equipment for intervention at borders (such 
as vehicles, boats and aircraft); cooperation initiatives in the field of consular 
services; investment in the Schengen Information System (SIS) and Visa 
Information System (VIS), staff training, pilot projects and studies.
8.	Under the EBF 7,3 % has been set aside for Community Actions, which 
mainly support cooperation between Member States, Emergency Actions (as 
part of the Community Actions) and Specific Actions which address 
weaknesses at strategic border points.
9.	The EBF’s basic contribution is 50 % of the total cost of actions or 75 % for 
actions in Cohesion Fund countries or in “specific priority” areas, rising to 80 % 
for Specific Actions and 90 % for Community and Emergency Actions. 
10.	Table 1 shows the allocations to national programmes, per Member State, 
and to Community, Emergency and Specific actions. The share of the biggest 
EBF recipients is illustrated in Figure 4.

Table 1 ? EBF allocations from 2007–2013 

Allocations 2007-2013
in euro
Share of total
Spain
289 394 768
17,92 %
Italy
250 178 433
15,49 %
Greece
207 816 755
12,87 %
France
116 220 276
7,20 %
Germany
76 099 991
4,71 %
Poland
71 787 665
4,45 %
Malta
70 441 716
4,36 %
Romania1
59 467 068
3,68 %
Hungary
59 295 401
3,67 %
Finland
51 264 631
3,18 %
Slovenia
49 532 286
3,07 %
Bulgaria1
38 131 686
2,36 %
Netherlands
38 035 209
2,36 %
Lithuania2
31 674 480
1,96 %
Cyprus
30 017 404
1,86 %
Estonia
27 129 191
1,68 %
Portugal
23 948 902
1,48 %
Belgium
19 944 180
1,24 %
Switzerland1
17 677 832
1,09 %
Latvia
16 830 844
1,04 %
Czech Republic
15 853 542
0,98 %
Austria
13 875 936
0,86 %
Norway1
11 479 299
0,71 %
Sweden
10 887 663
0,67 %
Slovakia
8 675 910
0,54 %
Denmark
7 874 409
0,49 %
Luxembourg
598 220
0,04 %
Iceland1
444 240
0,03 %
Total
1 614 577 936
100,00 %
Community/Emergency actions
91 214 322
Specific actions
45 000 000
Special Transit Scheme Lithuania2
108 000 000
Commission Technical Assistance
2 794 774
EBF total
1 861 587 032

1 Bulgaria, Romania Norway, Iceland and Switzerland have participated in the EBF since 2010.
2 The allocation shown for Lithuania does not include the Special Transit Scheme (STS). The 
STS is related to fees foregone and additional costs incurred due to the crossing of citizens of 
the Russian Federation to and from Kaliningrad region and amounts to 15 million euro 
annually for 2007-2010 and 16 million euro for 2011-2013.
Source: European Commission.

Figure 4 ? Member States’ share of EBF allocations
 
Source: European Commission.

The EBF in context
11.	Most expenditure related to external border management is funded 
nationally . Member States are responsible for the management of their 
external borders, applying the common rules established in the Schengen 
acquis. The European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation 
at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union (Frontex) 
coordinates cooperation between Member States and provides risk analyses 
and training. Thus the EBF is one piece of the jigsaw in the area of external 
border management (see Figure 5).
12.	The EBF is part of the “General programme on Solidarity and Management 
of Migration Flows for the period 2007–2013” (SOLID programme) managed by 
the Home Affairs DG. The SOLID programme is designed to improve the 
management of migratory flows at EU level and to help share the financial 
burden resulting from the integrated management of common external borders 
and implementation of common policies on immigration and asylum .




Figure 5 ? Stakeholders and influences in the area of border management and visas
 
Source: ECA.


13.	External factors, such as the recent upheavals in North Africa together with 
ongoing political and economic crises in other parts of the world, have resulted 
in massive migrant streams which have put considerable pressure on the EU’s 
external borders. Search and rescue operations are not among the EBF’s 
priorities, however in the course of border surveillance patrols EBF co-financed 
equipment can be (and has been) used for saving lives at sea. 
Roles and responsibilities
14.	The EBF is mainly implemented through shared management . According 
to this principle, the Member States are responsible for the implementation 
(operational and financial) of the funded actions while the Commission remains 
responsible for overall budget execution. The Commission adopts strategic 
guidelines setting out the EU programming framework. Each participating 
Member State prepares a multi-annual programme applying these strategic 
guidelines on the basis of its own needs.
15.	The multi-annual programme is implemented through annual programmes. 
Both are subject to the Commission’s approval. Member States submit final 
reports after the completion of each annual programme.
16.	The Commission is also responsible for ensuring that the Member States 
have set up adequate management and control systems, that appropriate 
information, publicity and follow-up is provided for the funded projects and that 
actions are consistent with, and complementary to, other relevant Union 
policies and initiatives.
17.	Member States’ implementation is monitored by the Commission through 
desk-reviews of management and control systems descriptions and of progress 
and final reports and by audit and monitoring visits.
18.	At Member State level, the management and control system comprises :
(a)	The Responsible Authority (RA), responsible for managing and 
implementing the multi-annual programme. In particular, it submits multi-
annual and annual programmes to the Commission, selects operations and 
verifies the eligibility of the expenditure claimed by the final beneficiaries .
(b)	The Audit Authority (AA) performs audits to verify the functioning of the 
management and control systems . 
(c)	The Certifying Authority (CA) certifies that the expenditure declared 
complies with the applicable rules .
19.	The national co-financing can be subject to national control and audit 
depending on the Member State’s administrative procedures. 



AUDIT SCOPE AND APPROACH 
20.	The main audit question was to assess whether the EBF has contributed 
effectively to external border management. This has been broken down into the 
following sub-questions: 
(a)	Have the programmes and projects effectively supported the EBF’s 
priorities in external border management? 
(b)	Has the EBF provided financial solidarity between Member States, 
addressed the Fund’s specific priorities and thereby delivered EU added 
value? 
(c)	Have the EBF’s programming and implementation procedures contributed 
to the Fund’s effectiveness?
(d)	Are the Member States and the Commission using monitoring and 
evaluation appropriately to improve the effectiveness of the EBF? 
21.	The audit covered:
(a)	the shared management parts of the EBF managed and implemented by 
Member States and
(b)	the Community Actions (including Emergency Actions) and Specific 
Actions directly managed by the Commission and implemented by Member 
States.
22.	The audit focused on processes related to the EBF’s effectiveness, EU 
added value and the achievement of the objectives of projects and 
programmes. It sought to examine the design, programming and 
implementation as well as monitoring and evaluation of EBF funded measures. 
The audit did not perform a detailed analysis of the management and control 
systems in the Member States , nor did it undertake a direct measurement of 
impact achieved through EBF funded measures but based its assessment on 
monitoring and evaluation data of Member States and the Commission. 
23.	The audit was based on: 
(a)	a documentary review of the multiannual and annual programmes final 
reports (covering 2007-2010 programmes) and contributions to evaluations 
of five selected Member States ; Commission reports on allocation of 
resources, the Commission’s intermediate report on results achieved and 
its draft ex post evaluation; Council documents and selected Frontex 
studies and documents;
(b)	interviews and collection of information on-the-spot at the level of the 
Commission, the Responsible Authorities and final beneficiaries in the five 
selected Member States. Interviews were also conducted with other 
stakeholders such as the Council in the case of the Schengen 
evaluations , Frontex and the EU Agency for Fundamental Rights;
(c)	on-the-spot visits to 31 completed projects in the selected Member States 
based on a judgmental (non-random) sample (see Annex) covering annual 
programmes from 2007-2010;
(d)	a desk-review of seven completed projects  directly managed by the 
Commission based on a judgmental (non-random) sample covering annual 
work programmes from 2007-2011 (see Annex);
(e)	a separate audit  that took place in one of the selected Member States 
(Spain) that touched on the EBF.
24.	The audit was carried out against the background of the Commission’s 
proposals for the 2014-2020 funding period which will create the Internal 
Security Fund as a successor to the EBF  providing for financial support for 
the management of external borders and visas. The proposals will involve 
changes in both content and the management and control system. Where 
relevant, these proposals were taken into account in this audit.


OBSERVATIONS
25.	The Court presents its main audit findings in four sections. The first section 
shows that the EBF has contributed to external border management but the 
overall result could not be measured. The second section focuses on the EBF 
fostering financial solidarity and its EU added value. Programming and 
implementation are discussed in the third section. Finally, monitoring and 
evaluation are dealt with in the fourth section. 
The EBF has contributed to external border management, but the overall 
result could not be measured and low implementation in some Member 
States limits impact
Programmes and projects geared towards the EBF’s priorities but the 
overall result could not be measured
26.	Multi-annual programmes and annual programmes in the five selected 
Member States were generally in line with, and contributed to, all five EBF 
priorities (Figure 2). However, given the weaknesses in the monitoring in these 
Member States and serious deficiencies in the ex post evaluations (see 
paragraphs 71 to 73) at both Member State and Commission level, it was not 
possible for the Court to make an adequate assessment of the Fund’s overall 
achievements. 
27.	Most audited projects supported the achievement of the EBF’s priorities. 
Out of 31 projects audited on the spot (see Annex) in the five selected Member 
States, five supported the EBF priorities only partially (because they included 
project expenditure which was ineligible  or relevance of that expenditure to 
the EBF  could not be determined) . One further project’s  contribution to 
achieving the priorities went against the EBF’s aims  by not complying with the 
principle of respectful treatment and dignity (see paragraph 60). 
28.	Most projects achieved their intended output but measurable targets and 
indicators were not set (see paragraphs 52 to 54) and reports did not 
adequately demonstrate the outcome and impact achieved (see Figure 6 for 
examples of output, outcome and impact indicators). 
Figure 6 ? Examples of output, outcome and impact indicators








Source: 	ECA examples, based on the Commission’s model whereby results are 
referred to as outcomes. 
Low implementation in some Member States
29.	The average implementation rate of the EBF national programmes 2007-
2010 was 87,6 %. However problems existed in a small number of Member 
States (Figure 7). In particular this is the case in Greece where planning and 
implementation failed to the extent that only 43 % of its EBF allocation was 
implemented .
Figure 7 ? EBF Implementation rate 2007-2010
 

Source: 	Calculation made by the Commission in the framework of the ex post 
evaluation on both closed programmes and, where programmes were not closed, on 
estimations by Member States. Bulgaria, Iceland, Norway and Romania provided data 
only for 2010 annual programmes. Denmark and Poland did not provide data on 2010 
programme implementation. The implementation rates for Cyprus and the Czech 
Republic were not final. Denmark did not provide implementation rates for total budget. 
No data for Switzerland and Luxembourg. The Greek figure is based on the final 
reports of its annual programmes.

Whilst the EBF has fostered financial solidarity, further EU added value 
has been limited
30.	The Court sought to establish whether the EBF’s aim of fostering financial 
solidarity was achieved. It also sought evidence that  the EBF delivered further 
EU added value, notably by targeting the specific priorities (see Figure 2), 
supporting cooperation between Member States or by being directed at the 
most urgent problems.
31.	The EBF allocations clearly helped to spread the Member States financial 
burden caused by the introduction of the Union’s integrated management of 
common external borders. Member States having a higher relative burden 
receive higher EBF aid (see Figure 4). However, the Court found that the 
EBF’s further EU added value was limited due to: 
(a)	a partially ineffective system for reinforcing specific priorities, 
(b)	 little support of operational cooperation between Member States,
(c)	ill-designed mechanisms for responding to specific weaknesses at strategic 
border points and partially effective mechanisms to respond to 
emergencies, and 
(d)	the support of programmes and projects which would have been financed 
nationally in any case, lacking a proper needs assessment or containing 
significant ineligible costs in some of the projects audited. 
 
Photo 1 - Three EBF co-financed class 300 all-weather vessels of the  
Italian Coast Guard operating from Lampedusa, Italy
Source: ECA.
Partially ineffective system for reinforcing specific priorities
32.	The Commission has drawn up strategic guidelines to define priorities, 
complemented by specific priorities for implementing the EBF in the Member 
States which have EU added value and to provide incentives therefor. Projects 
supporting specific priorities such as SIS, VIS (Box 1), consular cooperation 
and EUROSUR were eligible for a higher co-financing rate. However, this 
incentive (75 % instead of the standard 50 %) is ineffective in the 15 Cohesion 
Fund countries  (which account for approximately 60 % of EBF allocation) 
because they receive 75 % co-financing anyway. Some Member States (Spain 
and Malta) confirmed that specific priorities were not a factor in designing their 
programmes.
33.	In addition, three out of 12 specific priorities had not been clearly formulated 
by the Commission  or lacked practicality, further limiting their ability to deliver 
EU added value. Since the 2011 annual programmes, the Commission has 
tried to focus EBF funding on specific priorities but, due to a lack of monitoring, 
there is no evidence that this has increased their use. 
34.	However, due to the lack of a system for monitoring the use of specific 
priorities and a reliable and adequate ex post evaluation at Commission level, 
the full extent of support for actions with “high” EU added value could not be 
determined by the Court.
Box 1 – EBF contribution to SIS II and VIS
Despite the lack of monitoring the Court found evidence of the EBF’s contribution to 
the specific priorities establishing the SIS II and VIS IT systems. During its on-the-spot 
visits to such projects the Court found that EBF support was deemed to be crucial to 
the development of the national systems . However, the delays and changes in IT 
systems at EU level  impacted on the EBF’s efficiency and effectiveness since 
amendments had to be carried out and equipment purchased could not be used .

Little support of operational cooperation between Member States
35.	In two specific areas where the EBF was intended to support cooperation 
between Member States, namely consular cooperation and Frontex operations, 
limited results were achieved. 
36.	The goal of the EBF (within its priority 3) to fund the development of 
consular cooperation, and Common Application Centres in particular, has only 
been achieved to a limited extent despite the 90 % co-financing rates available 
under Community Actions. Only two Common Applications Centres were 
funded (see Box 2 for one example) and only one Member State (France) 
planned a consular cooperation project through other forms of cooperation 
(such as colocation or outsourcing). Instead, Member States  used the EBF to 
renovate, adapt and equip their own national consulates - sometimes in the 
same countries. The use of the EBF in such a manner failed to exploit 
economies of scale and benefit from cooperation between Member States to 
improve visa application procedures and prevent visa fraud. 
Box 2 - “Maison Schengen” Common Applications Centre in Kinshasa, 
Democratic Republic of Congo
Financed by two Community Action projects (2007 and 2009, total EBF funding 
845 704 euro), the Belgian-Portuguese initiative’s aim was to create the first Schengen 
Common Visa Application Centre. Each participating Member State remains 
responsible for the back office processing. However, the application processes are 
centralised allowing multiple Member States to pool and share resources. This 
centralisation supports better, more efficient and more humane reception of visa 
applicants and the fight against ‘visa shopping’  and fraud. At the end of 2013, the 
Centre represented 17 Schengen States.
37.	The second area of cooperation where the EBF had only a limited impact is 
the support of operations coordinated by Frontex through the increase in 
the number of assets at its disposal. The strategic guidelines contain a 
specific priority which was designed to reinforce Frontex’s operational capacity. 
However, as with other specific priorities, the incentive mechanism had little 
effect (see paragraph 32) and its results have not been measured.
38.	The Court verified whether EBF co-financed assets were recorded in the 
Frontex equipment pool. This would support Frontex in its planning and 
implementation of (Joint) operations (Box 3). Even though many EBF co-
financed assets would be suitable for Frontex missions, there is no legal 
obligation to record EBF co-financed equipment in the equipment pool. The 
Court found that only two out of a sample of 16 aircraft and patrol vessels were 
so recorded. This limits Frontex’s ability to plan and implement (Joint) 
operations
39.	Moreover, in spite of the Commission’s legal obligation and Frontex’s 
requests, Frontex did not receive any information from the Commission on the 
implementation of the Fund (such as assets purchased) until June 2013, 
thereby further limiting its planning and operational ability and its checks to 
prevent double-financing of operational costs. 
Box 3 - Example of good practice putting assets at the disposal of Frontex 
operations 
The two assets in the Court’s sample registered in Frontex’ equipment pool were 
aircraft of the Armed Forces of Malta. 
Despite facing regular migration pressure itself, Malta made one of its EBF procured 
surveillance aircraft available for 90 hours for a specific Frontex Joint Operation in 
Spain in October 2012.
 
Photo 2 - Fixed wing maritime patrol aircraft co-financed by the EBF to enhance 
the border control capabilities of the Armed Forces of Malta
© Armed Forces of Malta

40.	For the period 2014-2020, the Commission has proposed to incentivise only 
two priorities of national programmes, by increasing EU co-financing to 90 % 
and by providing additional funding. Specific actions are abolished. The 
priorities to be incentivised are the ones where the Court found limited EU 
added value, namely consular cooperation and the Fund’s contribution to 
Frontex operations. While an enhanced involvement of Frontex is planned in 
the Fund’s management, comprehensive information exchange between the 
Agency and the Commission in both shared and direct management 
programme implementation is not envisaged. In addition, there is still no 
general obligation that EBF funded assets should be entered into the Frontex 
technical equipment pool.
EBF mechanism to address specific weaknesses at strategic border 
points and emergency mechanism were partially effective
41.	One element of the EBF’s potential EU added value is its ability to be 
directed at the most urgent problems, which are typically the most threatened 
border areas or general emergency situations. In order to judge the 
effectiveness of the EBF’s mechanism to respond to emergencies and to 
address specific weaknesses at strategic border points, the Court examined the 
relevant funding streams of the EBF. The audit showed that the Specific 
actions were used as a simple “top-up” for the Member States’ annual 
programmes. The Member States and the Commission failed to ensure 
coordination between these different parts of the EBF, resulting in a loss of an 
overview of which project is funded, where and why.
42.	Furthermore, the Court found that part of the Emergency Actions were used 
for non-emergency situations or were poorly managed (see Box 4). 
Box 4 – Partially effective system of funding for emergencies at the external 
borders
Case 1: Supporting actions which were not emergencies
The 2011 Emergency Actions were entirely used for eight projects totalling about 
7,5 million euro to support Member States in their final stages of SIS II development, 
even though that project had begun in 2001. Moreover in one case the expenditure 
had already been financed by the Member State. 
Case 2: Example of poor management of emergency projects
The 2010 Emergency Actions consisted of three projects granted to Italy for about 
4 million euro to deal with the migration inflow due to the Arab spring of which the 
Court audited two. One of these projects was to fund internal transportation of 
migrants . Its application did not contain any reference to the number of migrants that 
could be transported, making assessment of value for money impossible. The actual 
number of migrants transported was not reported and was only submitted after a 
specific request from the Commission, without information on the transportation time 
targets set or any other details which would enable the project to be evaluated. In 
addition, only half of the project budget was implemented and no reasons for this were 
given in the project’s final report. The other audited project  also suffered from lack of 
quantifiable targets and appropriate reporting.
43.	Under the EBF 10 million euro was available annually for projects 
addressing specific weaknesses at strategic border points. These Specific 
Actions were not included in the Commission’s EBF proposal but inserted by 
the Council. The procedure to select the projects was lengthy and the 
implementation period (six months) was far too short for projects involving 
procurement of specialised equipment such as helicopters, resulting in a low 
implementation rate. Greece, for example, despite its needs, was not able to 
implement nine out of 11 approved projects under 2008-2010 Specific Action 
programmes. Of the two Italian Specific Action projects audited in detail, the 
Court found that some elements were used outside the border areas and 
others were completely outside the EBF’s scope (see Box 5).
44.	Given these inherent design restrictions in the legislation and the 
implementation problems, the Commission took the decision not to carry out 
any Specific Actions in 2013. 
Box 5 - Specific Actions used outside the border area
The Court examined one project from the 2009 Specific Actions and one from 2010. 
Both were implemented by the Italian Ministry of the Interior, the end user of the 
equipment being the police.
2009 Specific Actions: Six months rental of vehicles to be used at the Italian 
southern maritime borders 
The project responded to the call for tenders which specified the territorial scope as 
“the maritime border of Italy (Mediterranean sea and Sicilian sea)”. The grant 
application stated that the project would “increase the effectiveness of surveillance 
activity in the ports area and coastline of Central Mediterranean region”. However all 
137 cars were delivered to C.I.E. (Identification and Expulsion Centre) located as far 
north as Turin, Milan and Bologna and were not involved in surveillance of the external 
border. The Commission nevertheless approved the costs (final grant amount 
950 688 euro).
2010 Specific Actions: Border Patrolling 
The project planned to purchase police vehicles (the application is inconsistent as to 
how many cars should be purchased and their use) for patrolling the maritime borders 
in the south of Italy and especially the south-western coastline. However the vehicles 
were used close to the C.I.E.  and C.A.R.A. (Asylum and Refugee Centre). In the 
evaluation of the final report the Commission noted that the allocation of 22 of 
43 vehicles purchased under the project was not in line with the territorial scope of the 
call for proposals as they were used (as above) in/around C.I.E and C.A.R.A. The 
related costs (337 405 euro) were subsequently considered ineligible by the 
Commission (final grant amount 560 259 euro out of 1 192 559 euro approved).

Support for projects which would have been financed nationally in any 
case, lacking a proper needs assessment or containing significant 
ineligible costs
45.	The Court found that, in  two of the five Member States in the Court’s 
sample (Greece and Spain), many projects had already been financed, or 
would have been financed, nationally in any case at the time they were 
included in the annual programmes. This was also the case for one of the three 
audited Emergency Actions where the project application already stated that 
the Member State had set the budget aside to fully finance it. Although the 
Fund’s rules allow this practice and it increases the implementation rate, the 
replacement of national expenditure of a Member State by EU funds would put 
at risk any EU added value. In the cases identified above there was no EU 
added value.
46.	In three Member States in the Court’s sample (Greece, Italy and Poland) 
the EU added value of certain projects could not be established due to the lack 
of an adequate assessment of the needs the projects aimed to address. In two 
Member States (Greece and Italy), the Fund had limited EU added value since 
some projects consisted of operating support such as fuel and consumables for 
equipment rather than building the Member States capacity in external border 
management. While support for such costs is permitted and might be justified in 
emergency situations, the Fund is intended to support principally the building of 
capacity , e.g. through infrastructure or procurement of equipment, not to 
finance running costs. 
47.	The EU added value of the EBF is further limited by the high amount of 
ineligible costs in some of the projects audited, resulting from expenses that 
are not in line with the Fund’s priorities or from equipment not working or 
operating as or where it should. In most cases found by the Court, these 
irregularities were not detected by the  national management and control 
systems in place (for examples relative to paragraphs 45 to 47 see Box 6).
Box 6 - Examples of projects with low or unknown EU added value 
Funding projects already financed
A Greek project to procure 75 police patrol and passenger vehicles was included in a 
revision to Greece’s 2009 annual programme in March 2011, after the vehicles had 
been acquired and financed from the national budget.
Lack of needs assessment and ineligible costs
In Italy, the Court audited a project (2010 annual programme) procuring 
355 operational vehicles for the Guardia di Finanza for their tasks on the detection and 
identification of immigrants at sea borders. The final beneficiary could not fully 
demonstrate how the number of vehicles needed was determined or on what basis 
they had been allocated to the different units. The numbers bought under the project 
increased primarily due to extra funds being available. The Court found cars are also 
used for “regular” police work.
In view of the lack of a needs assessment for the 355 vehicles and the fact that Italy 
purchased a total of 1 084 vehicles under the 2007-2010 annual programmes, there is 
a risk that EBF financing is spent on projects not responding to EBF priorities and that 
urgent needs are not met.
In another Italian project which was set up to extend software and fibre optic cable 
infrastructure between police offices in Central and Northern Italy the Court was 
provided with contradictory information by the Italian authorities on the costs of the 
overall investment and on how the eligible costs were calculated. As a result it was 
unable to determine the extent to which the 22 million euro declared as eligible costs 
(to be co-financed 50 % by the EBF) in the 2007 annual programme was related to the 
EBF. 
Similar problems were found in Malta for a 2007 annual programme project totalling 
approximately 540 000 euro where the Member State was not able to demonstrate 
why certain costs (mainly relating to building works) were apportioned to the project.
 
Photo 3 - A police patrol vehicle in Greece co-financed by EBF
Source: ECA.
Strategic and operational weaknesses in EBF programming and 
implementation at Member State and Commission level 
48.	The Court assessed key processes for the Fund’s effectiveness, namely 
programming and project selection, and found that programmes are not 
embedded in national strategies and lack SMART objectives and measurable 
indicators. Programming requirements lead to an excessive administrative 
burden. In certain Member States, project selection procedures did not 
adequately ensure that the Member States’ needs were met. In addition, the 
audit found weaknesses in procurement procedures, putting financial 
management at risk. 
Programmes not embedded in national strategies for border control and 
visas …
49.	In the selected Member States, the Court examined whether the multi-
annual programme and the annual programmes were based on a national 
strategy for border management and visa matters and if they were coordinated 
with national, other EU and international funds. According to the 3rd version of 
the Schengen Catalogue on external borders control, return and readmission  
such a strategy “should clearly delegate tasks” and include “the assessments of 
the working environment, risks and threats, analyses of resources needed, as 
well as action and development plans”. Only when such a comprehensive 
assessment exists can maximum efficiency and effectiveness be obtained from 
the EBF. The Court also analysed, on the basis of the Schengen Evaluations, 
whether such a national strategy was based on the Common Integrated Risk 
Analysis Model (CIRAM)  assessing relative risks posed by different threats 
for border and visa management. 
50.	In four out of the five Member States in the Court’s sample (that is, except 
Poland) the Court found that the multi-annual programme and, as a result the 
annual programmes, are not embedded in a comprehensive strategy, simply 
because no such strategy exists. While there were many individual strategy 
papers, these often remained confined to a single authority. Although the multi-
annual programmes were obliged to contain a section on complementarity 
between national and EBF funding, the Court found that explanations were 
incomplete or non-existent. In all five Member States a common integrated risk 
analysis is only in the development stage or is not used at all. This lack of a 
comprehensive view based on a risk analysis means that neither the 
Commission nor Member States can objectively determine whether the 
measures financed by the EBF fit into the general strategy of the Member 
States, target actual needs and why they were selected to be financed by the 
EBF.
51.	In three Member States (Spain, Malta and Poland) the Court found 
evidence that the EBF was not appropriately coordinated with other EU funds  
or with other international funds . This risks a loss in efficiency and 
effectiveness for the funds involved since they could each be targeting similar 
actions.
... lacking SMART objectives and measurable indicators
52.	The Court examined whether multi-annual and annual programmes and 
projects included SMART objectives and indicators which are relevant, 
measurable and paired with a target value. 
53.	The five Member States in the Court’s sample did not include SMART 
objectives and measurable indicators in their multi-annual and annual 
programmes or projects. Most programme and project descriptions lacked 
target values. In addition, in Greece targets for the 2008, 2009 and 2010 
annual programmes were only set after the projects had been implemented, 
thereby making them redundant. An analysis of 2012 annual programmes 
showed improvements in the formulation of indicators for three Member States, 
but for two of these no progress was made on establishing targets for 
indicators.
54.	Although it can be difficult to establish outcome and impact indicators for 
border management and visas, the Commission has shown in guidance notes 
that it is possible. Due to the absence of obligatory common indicators, 
Member States used differing sets of indicators, not only between programmes 
but also for similar measures, making proper evaluation impossible. Despite the 
low quality of the objectives and indicators in the Member States’ programmes, 
the Commission nevertheless approved them, in view of the need to implement 
the Fund (see Box 7).
Box 7 - Examples of vague and inappropriate indicators
One project consisted of the procurement of two medium-sized vessels for sea patrols 
and was funded by the Spanish 2008 annual programme. Similar to other audited 
projects in Spain , the Court found indicators which were not relevant, not recorded 
and/or set without appropriate consultation with the final beneficiary by the 
Responsible Authority. 
The ‘expected results’ of the project were very vague and mostly without explanation 
as to how they could be measured e.g. ‘enhanced efficacy and efficiency of the 
resources dedicated to sea patrol missions’, ‘better security conditions on missions’, 
and ‘greater border security’. The only measurable expected result was a ‘reduction in 
the number of vessels illegally reaching Spanish-European coasts’. However, the 
difficulty with this indicator is that the causal link between action and results needs to 
be carefully examined. 
55.	The Commission has already reacted to some of the weaknesses caused 
by the lack of common indicators by proposing obligatory common indicators 
for the funding period 2014-2020. Member States will have to develop 
programme-specific indicators.
Annual programming requirements leading to an excessive 
administrative burden and implementation difficulties
56.	While the intention was tighter supervision of the programmes put in place 
by the Responsible Authorities, the requirement to produce annual 
programmes in addition to multi-annual programmes led to an excessive 
administrative burden at both Member State and Commission level as well as 
significant delays. The initial submission of poor quality programmes by the 
Member States - frequently not respecting the requirements set out in the legal 
bases – caused delays in approval of annual programmes. The time lag 
between the first submission and the final version of annual programmes 
averaged six and a half months. As a result, the implementation time for 
projects was often severely reduced.
57.	The EBF’s annual programmes also did not fit well with the lengthy 
procurement procedures needed for sophisticated equipment. As a result, 
projects were delayed or could not be financed by the Fund. In recognition of 
the above-mentioned difficulties, only multi-annual programmes will be 
established in the 2014-2020 funding period.
Some Member States’ project selection procedures did not ensure that 
their actual needs are met
58.	The Court examined the procedure used by Member States to select 
projects. Serious weaknesses in the project selection procedures were found in 
Italy and, for the early years only, in Malta, putting into question whether the 
most relevant projects were selected. 
59.	In Italy, allocation of funds between public entities and subsequent project 
selection had several flaws. Due to a complete lack of audit trail, the Court 
could not verify on what basis the allocation between final beneficiaries was 
decided for the 2007 and 2008 annual programmes. For later years, the 
reasons given by the Responsible Authority for the distribution of the allocation 
were either misleading or not subsequently applied to the distribution of the 
resources. As a result, the increasingly high allocation for the Ministry of Interior 
- Department of Public Security - Central Directorate for Immigration and 
Border Police – the body in which the Responsible Authority is housed – to the 
detriment of other bodies such as the Coast Guard could not be justified. The 
same Ministry was also the only Italian body to have benefited from Emergency 
and Specific Actions between 2007-2012, even though several other forces 
(under different ministries) are involved in Italy’s border management. The 
exclusion or marginalisation of the other authorities risks that their needs are 
not met. 
60.	The selection and subsequent funding of a temporary detention centre in 
Greece did not comply with the principle of respectful treatment and dignity 
(see Box 8).
Box 8 - Funding for a detention centre in Greece
The Court examined the rental costs of a temporary detention centre at Pagani (also 
known as the Mytilini Special Facility for Irregular Migrants) on the island of Lesbos. 
The project was implemented by the Responsible Authority (Ministry of Public Order 
and Citizen Protection). 
The Responsible Authority included the project in a late revision to the 2008 annual 
programme, for “hosting of migrants in hotels and rooms”. However, what was actually 
financed was the rent of the Pagani centre from 1 January 2008 to 30 June 2010 at a 
total cost of 267 405 euro. 
The centre was repeatedly criticised by human rights organisations for its poor 
conditions. Originally a storage site for goods, it was converted to accommodate 
300 persons. In 2008, there were 720 migrants detained in the facility. Conditions were 
described as “abominable” and “a health hazard for staff and detainees alike”  . In 
October 2009, upon visiting the centre, UNHCR called for the centre to be shut down. 
Between late October 2009 and June 2010 the centre was gradually deactivated.
At the time of the decision to fund the project, the unacceptable conditions were widely 
known. The Greek authorities, however, provided a misleading project description to 
the Commission which, upon analysis of the final report, now plans to deduct the 
expenditure from the final payment. 
Inadequate procurement procedures in Member States putting sound 
financial management at risk
61.	The Court audited the procurement procedures in eleven projects. In eight 
of these the procedures did not satisfy the relevant legal provisions or were 
conducted in a way which did not ensure that value for money was achieved. 
One procurement procedure, the acquisition of patrol dogs in Greece, failed 
completely due to an inadequate procedure. Although the 40 vehicles were 
delivered in May 2012, the dogs had not been procured as at June 2014. 
62.	The main weakness was the fact that three Member States did not 
adequately justify their use of the exception clause for defence and security 
procurements. For example, under its 2007 annual programme, Spain procured 
two fixed-wing aircraft for maritime patrols and the fight against irregular 
immigration at a cost of 50 million euro. The Spanish authorities declared the 
procurement to be “secret” and used the negotiated procedure without prior 
publication, inviting only one supplier. Less restrictive procedures could have 
been used without compromising security. In other Member States similar 
procurements were made using open tendering. 
63.	Other weaknesses in procurement procedures were the subsequent use of 
the same supplier without adequate competition and a lack of capacity and 
knowledge in public administration. 
64.	The Responsible Authorities’ verification of procurement procedures in four 
out of the five Member States (all except Poland) was inadequate or non-
existent despite large parts of EBF being spent using procurement.
65.	As a result, there is a risk that high value actions in certain programmes of 
the EBF such as the procurement of aircraft and vessels may not provide value 
for money.
Weaknesses in Responsible Authorities’ monitoring and serious 
deficiencies in the ex post evaluations by the Commission and Member 
States do not allow an adequate assessment of the Fund’s overall 
achievements 
66.	The Court sought to determine whether Member States and the 
Commission use monitoring and evaluation to assess and improve the 
effectiveness of the EBF. It found that monitoring and evaluation were seriously 
constrained by the lack of SMART objectives and measurable indicators, that 
there is a lack of adequate monitoring and reporting of projects at Member 
State level and that evaluation is delayed and suffers from serious deficiencies. 
Lack of adequate monitoring and reporting of projects by Member States
67.	In all of the Member States in the Court’s sample, the Responsible Authority 
did not carry out sufficient and/or adequate monitoring which would have 
enabled it to follow the implementation of projects and determine deviations 
from set objectives. Where they existed, monitoring reports lacked important 
information such as results achieved against indicators or targets set or 
significant changes in the project execution stage. In Greece, there was no 
monitoring during project implementation for 2007-2009 because projects were 
generally introduced into the annual programme after they had been carried 
out. Although some on-the-spot checks were carried out, no checklists were 
available to show that qualitative aspects of funded projects were verified.
68.	In all five Member States, both at project level and for annual programmes, 
the final reports did not report satisfactorily on indicators or targets achieved. In 
three Member States there were several inconsistencies and errors in the final 
reports impacting on the reliability of the data. Spain did not require final project 
reports until the 2010 annual programme and only started monitoring during 
implementation from the 2009 annual programme. At the time of the audit 
(February 2014), Greece still did not require final project reports, which 
seriously restricts the information available on the project results achieved. 
Italy’s Responsible Authority has announced its intention to introduce 
monitoring visits as a result of the Court’s audit. 
69.	None of the Member States in the Court’s sample had set up an appropriate 
IT system from the start of the Fund to record indicators. While three Member 
States (Spain, Italy and Malta) have started developing an IT system that 
supports the RA management in the second half of the funding period, only the 
Italian system has a function that allows indicators and their values to be 
recorded. The Commission’s guidance did not explain the benefits of such IT 
systems and opportunities for exchange of best practices were lost.
70.	The reporting by Member States on Community Actions and Specific 
Actions show a similar lack of information on results achieved, often failing to 
include even the most basic information.
 
Photo 4 - An EBF co-financed cabin on the Spanish-Moroccan border in El 
Tarajal, Ceuta
Source: ECA.
Delays and serious deficiencies in the ex post evaluations at both 
Member State and Commission level
71.	The Commission, in partnership with the Member States, is responsible for 
evaluating the Fund in order to assess the relevance, effectiveness and impact 
of its actions. The first of the two ex post evaluations, covering 2007-2010, was 
due to be delivered by the Commission to the European Parliament and other 
institutions by 31 December 2012.
72.	The Court analysed the contributions of the Member States in the Court’s 
sample to this evaluation and found a series of omissions, errors and 
inaccuracies in all five national evaluation reports. As a result, the reliability of 
the overall ex post evaluation report is significantly reduced. Part of the reason 
for the limited amount of quantified information provided by the Member States 
was that the type of data to be reported was only established by the 
Commission in 2011. By this point all actions for inclusion in the evaluation had 
started and most had finished, and consequently Member States’ were unable 
to adapt indicators to be collected. This led to a general weakness in the quality 
of quantitative information presented in the evaluation, as well as inefficiency 
and additional work in compiling data retroactively.
73.	In analysing the Commission’s ex post evaluation report, the Court found 
summaries of a large amount of both qualitative and quantitative information 
which had been collected from the Member States. However, the presentation 
of the data is descriptive in nature, without analysis of their significance. For 
example, data are presented without any useful baseline or benchmark 
information or in a format which does not offer additional understanding (e.g. 
“number of systems acquired or upgraded”). Furthermore, the evaluation omits 
to deal with Community Actions, Emergency Actions and Specific Actions 
thereby further diminishing its value. Consequently, the ex post evaluation 
cannot be considered a useful or reliable report to assess the effective impact 
of the External Borders Fund.
74.	Despite an extended deadline, only eight out of the 28 Member States sent 
their contribution to the Commission on time, thereby encroaching upon the 
time available for the Commission and its external contractor to work with the 
data. Delays also occurred at Commission level. At the time of the conclusion 
of the Court’s audit work (March 2014) and more than one year after the 
deadline, the report had not yet been adopted by the Commission, limiting the 
availability of information for EBF stakeholders.



CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
75.	The audit showed that the EBF has contributed to external border 
management and fostered financial solidarity. However its further EU added 
value was limited, overall result could not be measured due to weaknesses in 
the Responsible Authorities’ monitoring and there were serious deficiencies in 
the  ex post evaluations by the Commission and the Member States. Crucially, 
the audit found serious weaknesses in the management of the Fund in key 
Member States, i.e. in Greece, Spain, Italy and, for the early funding years, 
Malta. These weaknesses carry the risk that border management is not 
adequately strengthened where it is most needed.
The EBF has contributed to external border management, but the overall 
result could not be measured due to the lack of SMART objectives and 
serious deficiencies in evaluation
76.	The Court found that it was not able to assess the extent to which the EBF 
has supported the Fund’s priorities. Member States’ programmes lacked 
SMART objectives and measurable indicators which, together with the lack of 
common indicators, made proper evaluation by the Commission impossible. 
Despite the low quality of the objectives and indicators, the Commission 
approved the Member States’ programmes, in view of the need to implement 
the Fund (see paragraphs 53 to 54).
77.	Responsible Authorities did not or only insufficiently monitored the 
achievement of results. Monitoring and final reports lacked relevant information 
on effectiveness and/or information was unreliable. None of the Member States 
in the Court’s sample had an IT system to collect monitoring data from the start. 
Only Italy was developing such a system for future use (see paragraph 72). 
The Member States’ contributions to the ex post evaluation and the 
Commission’s report suffered delays and had serious deficiencies (see 
paragraph 73).
78.	The Commission has proposed obligatory common indicators for the 2014-
2020 funding period and Member States will have to develop their own 
programme-specific indicators.

Recommendation 1
The Commission should:
-	ensure that all indicators to be used are relevant, measurable and, where 
possible, paired with a target value;
-	ensure that indicators are collected from the start and, where not already in 
place, that IT systems are developed;
-	provide clear guidelines to Member States so that they have a common 
understanding of obligatory indicators so that aggregation for monitoring 
and evaluation purposes will be possible;
-	deliver its evaluation report on time and present stakeholders with an 
analysis of underlying data.

Recommendation 2
Member States should: 
-	have appropriate expertise  available in the administration for the design 
and application of SMART objectives and measurable indicators;
-	set targets for output, outcome and, where possible, impact indicators;
-	collect actual values of indicators from the start of the programme using 
appropriate IT systems and ensure that information is reliable;
-	apply their experience with similar IT systems gained in the Structural 
Funds field.

The EBF has fostered financial solidarity but further EU added value has 
been limited
79.	The Court found that the EBF helped to spread the Member States’ financial 
burden arising from the integrated management of external borders but that 
further EU added value of the Fund was limited:
(a)	in consular cooperation; 
(b)	in support of Frontex operations;
(c)	on Emergency Actions and Specific Actions;
(d)	by funding actions which were or would have been financed nationally. 
The Fund’s full potential was not exploited due to weaknesses in the design of 
the incentive system.
80.	For the period 2014-2020, the Commission has proposed to incentivise 
consular cooperation and the Fund’s contribution to Frontex operations. While 
enhanced involvement of Frontex is planned in the Fund’s management, 
comprehensive information exchange between the Agency and the 
Commission in both shared and direct management programme 
implementation is not envisaged. In addition, there is still no general obligation 
that EBF/ISF funded assets which would be of use to Frontex should be 
entered into the Frontex technical equipment pool. 
Recommendation 3
To support consular cooperation:
-	the Member States and Commission should concentrate more on 
establishing Common Application Centres and other forms of consular 
cooperation rather than the renovation, adaptation or equipping of 
consulates.

Recommendation 4
To support the work of Frontex:
-	the legislator should consider making the entering of relevant ISF co-
financed assets into Frontex’s technical equipment pool obligatory;
-	the Commission should provide Frontex with relevant, comprehensive and 
timely information regarding EBF/ISF implementation in the Member States 
such as programmes, annual implementation reports and evaluations as 
well as information on directly managed programmes and projects. 
Information should take into account the option of “operating support” 
introduced with the new 2014-2020 framework and a robust system to 
avoid double funding needs to be put in place.
Strategic weaknesses in EBF programming
81.	The audit found that four out of five Member States do not programme the 
EBF as part of their comprehensive national strategy on border and visa 
management. In all Member States in the Court’s sample a common integrated 
risk analysis is only under development or is not used at all. 
Recommendation 5
The national EBF programmes should be based on a comprehensive strategy 
for border management, with Member States basing their strategy on a risk 
analysis using the Common Integrated Risk Analysis Model. 

Recommendation 6
The legislator should consider making compliance with Schengen Catalogue 
recommendations on strategy and risk analysis an ex-ante condition for 
receiving future ISF support.
Weaknesses in EBF implementation 
82.	In the three principal recipient Member States (Greece, Spain and Italy) the 
Court found recurrent deficiencies in EBF planning, implementation, monitoring 
and evaluation, impacting on the effectiveness of the EBF. 
83.	In the Member States in the Court’s sample (apart from Poland) the Court 
found inadequate procurement procedures which put the sound financial 
management of the Fund at risk.
Recommendation 7
Administrative capacity needs to be strengthened, for example through focused 
training by the Commission or through sharing best practices between Member 
States. 

Recommendation 8
Member States should strengthen administrative capacity in procurement and 
carry out the procurement of EBF/ISF assets through the most transparent 
procedures available.

This Report was adopted by Chamber IV, headed by Mr Milan Martin CVIKL, 
Member of the Court of Auditors, in Luxembourg at its meeting of 24 June 
2014.
	For the Court of Auditors

	Vítor Manuel da SILVA CALDEIRA 
	President




	ANNEX
Audited projects

Final beneficiary
Project name
Annual 
programme
Total final 
EBF 
expenditure 
in euro 


Malta


1
Malta Police – 
Police Immigration 
Section
Strengthening of Immigration Police capacity for border surveillance and patrols 
The aim of this project was to enhance the operational capabilities and surveillance 
possibilities of the Immigration Police particularly in combating the phenomenon of 
illegal immigration by providing the necessary equipment.
2007
491 567
2
VISET Malta plc
Bringing the Sea Passenger Terminals in line with the Schengen acquis Requirements 
(VISET)
The project’s objective  was to bring the passenger handling facilities at the Port of 
Valletta in line with the Schengen acquis requirements and best practices
2007
540 234
3
Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs
Setting up a new high-risk/high volume mission and its preparation for capturing 
biometrics
The aim of this project was to fully refurbish the recently acquired premises housing the 
new consular section in Moscow. The refurbishment project was intended to include the 
necessary security features and enable the mission to prepare itself for eventual 
biometric capture.
2007
285 335
4
Armed Forces of 
Malta
Procurement of inshore patrol vessels for the Armed Forces of Malta
The project provided the Armed Forces of Malta with replacement inshore patrol craft in 
order to have enhanced presence at sea and more rapid intervention capabilities
2008
7 200 000
5
Malta Police
Migration from SIS1 to SIS2 and from SIReNE1to SIReNE2
The overall objective was to finalise the final chapter of the integration of the Schengen 
Information System II with national police systems
2008
2 037 810
6
Armed Forces of 
Malta
Enhancing the border control capabilities of the Armed Forces of Malta – Procurement 
of a fixed wing maritime patrol aircraft
The aim of this project was to enhance the border control capabilities with the 
procurement of a fixed wing maritime patrol aircraft.
2009
7 269 636


Spain


7
Ministry of Interior: 
DG for 
Infrastructure and 
Material for 
Security
Technical support for the Schengen Information System
Specialized technical support for the Schengen Information System, for the correction, 
perfection and evolution of this system.
2010
129 129
8
Ministry of Interior:  
National police 
corps, part of the 
Directorate 
General for 
National Police and 
Guardia Civil
Acquisition of operational equipment for external border control
The purpose of the action was to provide the border crossing points with state-of-the-art 
equipment (such as equipment for document inspection or UV lamps) in order to 
increase the quality and efficiency of border control.
2007
274 885
9
Ministry of Interior: 
Directorate 
General for 
Infrastructures and 
Material for 
Security (DGIMS)
Acquisition of two medium-sized vessels for sea patrol (20 metre)
This acquisition aimed to enhance surveillance and intervention capacity of the Guardia 
Civil Maritime Service at sea permitting the Maritime Service to successfully complete 
its missions, especially the fight against illegal immigration, by allowing swift action 
within territorial waters. These patrol vessels were planned to be used in the 
Mediterranean coastal area. 
2008
2 143 680
10
Ministry of Interior: 
Directorate 
General for 
Infrastructures and 
Material for 
Security (DGIMS)
Work and refurbishment of the cabin filters of the border crossing in El Tarajal in the city 
of Ceuta
Works and refurbishment supporting National Police Corps Officers’ work on access 
and exit control of the persons in the national territory

2010
36 426
11
Ministry of Interior: 
Directorate 
General for 
Infrastructures and 
Material for 
Security (DGIMS)
Refurbishing, upgrading and reconstruction works in the border perimeter between 
Spain and Morocco (Ceuta and Melilla)
This project supported the funding of CCTV camera equipment, border-drainage 
facilities, turnstiles in Ceuta and also a watchtower in Melilla.
2010
164 386
12
Ministry of Interior: 
Directorate 
General of the 
Police and Civil 
Guard, area Civil 
Guard
Upgrading for the two aircraft for maritime patrol and fight against irregular immigration, 
bound for the Air Service of Guardia Civil (bought under the EBF annual programme 
2007)
The purchase of the two aircraft was co-financed under the EBF 2007 annual 
programme and had an overall contract value of 50 million euro. This purchase was 
also included in the Court's audit of the subsequent upgrade project.
 According to the annual programme 2010 “the aircrafts, due to numerous surveillance 
hours, need an upgrading for them to be able to perform surveillance activities; such as 
structural upgrading works and the acquisition of basic spare parts”.
2010
6 398 873
13
General Services 
Directorate Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs
Refurbishment and adaptation of consulates
The project concerns the adaptation, expansion, redesign and relocation of consulates 
to ensure that they are properly furnished, that the employees are safe and that the visa 
applications process is efficient.
2010
835 695


Poland


14
Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs
Providing consular offices with equipment and software for biometric data collection
The purpose of the project was to provide consular offices with equipment and software 
for biometric data collection (e.g. fingerprint scanners). The project was financed out of 
two annual programmes. 
2007 and 2008
389 604
15
Polish Border 
Guard
Raising the  qualifications of personnel who carry out border protection operations using 
aircraft
Provision of specialised aircraft training courses for Border Guard pilots and mechanics 
to operate particular types of aircraft (Sokol and Kania helicopters, Skytruck aeroplane), 
including night-vision goggle training and training as instructors. The project was 
financed out of three annual programmes.
2007-2010
803 034
16
Polish Border 
Guard
Provision of the border guard with specialised means of transport
The project consisted of the acquisition of vehicles for the Border Guard services and 
was financed out of two annual programmes.
2008 and 2009
3 571 588
17
Podkarpacie 
Voivodship
Reconstruction of Building for detailed control at the entry to the country in the road 
border crossing Medyka-Szegine
Enlargement of building for controlling vehicles at Medyka-Szgenie border crossing 
point with Ukraine, increasing number of vehicle inspection bays from one to four and 
providing new equipment for inspection.
2009
645 113
18
Polish Border 
Guard
Extension and maintenance of teleinformation platform of the Border Guard to 
implement SIS II and VIS
The project consisted of four subprojects:
1) Development and maintenance of a system for the replication and reproduction of 
data – phase 1
2) Modernisation and maintenance of a system for recording conversations
3) Modernisation and maintenance of a hardware and software platform for support 
system requirements
4) Purchase of computer workstations for the needs of the Border Guard Central 
Database
2010
1 078 749



Italy


19
Ministry of Interior 
(Polizia di Stato)
Strengthening the transfer network infrastructure and extending SIA and VISA 
procedure to the benefit of the Immigration Offices and Border Police offices operating 
in central and northern Italian regions
The action was aimed at the planning, supply and implementation of a 
telecommunication system for the extension of the optical fibre network of additional 
2,600 km circa necessary to link Border Police offices, Questure and Police stations 
and enhancement and extension of the Anti-Immigration Information System (SIA) in 
central and northern Italy.
2007
11 023 303
20
Corps of the Port 
Captaincies (Coast 
Guard)
Acquire 4 offshore patrol vessels
This action is a continuation of a project from the 2007 annual programme. Both 
projects cover the purchase of four automatically self-righting and unsinkable class 300 
all-weather vessels.
The four patrol vessels operate in the territorial waters around Sicily and Sardinia.
2008
3 866 000
21
Ministry of Interior 
(Polizia di Stato)
Purchase fuel vouchers needed to support additional activities for prevention and 
control closely related to the current immigration emergency of Southern Italy
Purchasing fuel vouchers for diesel and petrol fuel intended for cars of the border 
police. The fuel allows the cars to do extra patrols in reaction to the flow of migrants 
from North Africa (Arab spring / regime changes in countries such as Libya and 
Tunisia).
2009
572 312
22
Guardia di Finanza
Purchase of operational vehicles
The goal of the project was to provide the Guardia di Finanza with motor vehicles for 
performing the tasks related to the detection and identification of immigrants at sea 
borders in the context of the fight against illegal immigration. 355 vehicles were bought.
2010
3 612 768
23
Ministry of Interior 
(Polizia di Stato) 
Purchase of a fixed-wing aircraft for the border police 
The purchase of a second aircraft (first aircraft purchased out of annual programme 
2009) for the border police to ensure coordination of operational activities, especially in 
relation to the management of crisis situations which can occur without warning in 
certain locations of the national territory
2010
3 377 748


Greece


24
Ministry of Citizen 
Protection/ Hellenic 
Police

The incorporation of the common training standard for the country’s police personnel
The project aimed to incorporate Frontex’s Common Training Standard into Greece’s 
police training system, by training 448 participants in three levels of courses. The 
Commons Standard provides for basic and periodic training of police officers and border 
guards involved in managing migrant flows.
2007
600 079
25
Ministry of Public 
Order and Citizen 
Protection
Rental costs of temporary detention centre on the Island of Lesbos
The project concerned the cost of renting a temporary detention centre at Pagani, close 
to Mytilini on the island of Lesbos.
2008
200 554

26
Ministry of Citizen 
Protection/ Hellenic 
Police
Purchase of Patrol Passenger Vehicles
The project aims to purchase 75 vehicles (split between patrol cars in police livery and 
unmarked passenger cars) to be used for patrols of the roads close to the border, 
aiming at controlling and protecting the external borders from the illegal entering of 
immigrants.
2009
1 115 807
27
Ministry of Citizen 
Protection/ Hellenic 
Police
Purchase of 4x4 police patrol vehicles (type jeep)
A total of 69 police patrol vehicles were procured through this project. These vehicles 
will be used for patrols in inaccessible and mountainous borders regions aiming to 
prevent illegal immigrants from entering the Greek territory.
2009
1 275 989
28
Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs
Support for the Installation of the Visa Information System
The objective of the action was to co-finance the implementation of N-VIS and NET-VIS 
IT systems, regarding costs for system design, implementation, roll out and personnel 
training. It is part of a multi-annual action aiming to install the EU Visa Information 
System (VIS) in Greece’s consulates.
2009
2 984 335
29
Ministry of Citizen 
Protection
The construction and upgrading of border infrastructure at the external land borders 
with Albania and Turkey for police services involved in the border control
The purpose of this action was to improve the border infrastructure at the Greek –
Albanian and the Greek – Turkish borders by construction of two new stations in 
Delvinaki and in Feres.
2010
2 117 706
30
Ministry of Citizen 
Protection / 
Hellenic Police
Purchase of Police Patrol Dogs and Police vehicles for their transportation
The project aimed to provide around 40 police dogs and vehicles for their 
transportation, with the purpose of detecting irregular migrants trying to cross the 
external land border. The vehicles envisaged were station wagons with four-wheel 
drive, to operate in rough terrain at the border.
2010
880 268
31
Ministry of Citizen 
Protection/ Hellenic 
Police
Support of the operational costs related to the implementation of integrated border 
management system at the land Greek-Turkish borders and Initial Reception and 
Detention Centres for illegal immigrants in Evros region
Operational-running costs of the Hellenic Police Services including maintenance costs 
for the patrol vehicles/vessels and other equipment, fuels and spare parts for 
vehicles/vessels involved in border control activities. Also photographic film, printing of 
photos, fluorescent lamps, tyres, a boiler.
2010
706 011



Emergency Actions, Community Actions and Specific Actions

Final Beneficiary
Project name
Annual Work 
Programme
Final EBF 
expenditure 
in euro


Emergency Actions


1
Police Grand 
Ducale de 
Luxembourg, 
Luxembourg
Upgrade of LU NS.SIS II from Development to Full Scale Production Setup at ICD 3.0 
level
Procurement of hardware and basic software licences to upgrade of development setup 
on the back up site to a full production deployment. This upgrade is necessary to meet 
the milestones on the way to the SIS II Entry into Operation. 
2011
575 857
2
Ministry of Interior, 
Central Directorate 
for Immigration and 
Border Police, 
Public Security 
Department, Italy
Reinforcement of transportation means to patrol the border crossing points area and the 
area close to the CIE (RECARS)
The project consisted of the purchase of 40 police vehicles to provide the reinforcement 
of means of transport within the maritime Border Police Offices and Immigration Offices. 
The action aimed to contribute to the increase of Police surveillance capacity in the 
South of Italy and in the areas in all the Italian territory, particularly close to the southern 
Centre for Identification and Expulsion (CIE).
2010
1 367 856
3
Ministry of Interior, 
Central Directorate 
for Immigration and 
Border Police, 
Public Security 
Department, Italy
Internal transportation of migrants (SHIFTS)
The action consisted in the organisation of displacements of migrants from Lampedusa 
by air, land or sea, to identify and get assistance to the migrants in several different 
places duly equipped.
2010
1 665 247


Community Actions


4
Belgian State 
Federal Public 
Service Foreign 
Affairs, Foreign 
Trade and 
Development 
Cooperation, 
Belgium
Schengen Visa Application Centre Kinshasa
The aim of the project was to create the first real Schengen Common Visa Application 
Centre. While each participating Member State would be responsible for the back office 
treatment, the application processes are centralised allowing multiple Member States to 
pool and share resources in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). Belgium’s 
partner in the project was Portugal (Ministerio Dos Negocios Estrangeiros).
2007
395 349
5
Belgian State 
Federal Public 
Service Foreign 
Affairs, Foreign 
Trade and 
Development 
Cooperation, 
Belgium
Maison Schengen Kinshasa
Continuation of the Project “Schengen Visa Application Centre Kinshasa” of 2007 since 
this project suffered delays and could not be fully executed within the 2007 Annual 
Work Programme. At the end of 2013, the Centre represented 17 Schengen States.

2009
450 356


Specific Actions


6
Italian Ministry of 
the Interior, 
Department of 
Public Security – 
Central Directorate 
for Immigration and 
Border Police, Italy
Six months rental of vehicles to be delivered at the Italian southern maritime borders 
(CAR2 )
The project foresaw the rental of 137 well equipped vehicles to provide a reinforcement 
of means within the maritime border police offices to improve Police surveillance 
capability in the south of Italy. The increase of vehicles available for patrolling the 
coastline would enable to intercept migrants attempting to illegally cross the border.
2009
950 688
7
Italian Ministry of 
the Interior, 
Department of 
Public Security – 
Central Directorate 
for Immigration and 
Border Police, Italy
Border Patrolling (Bor-trol)
The plan was to purchase 80 police vehicles to provide a reinforcement of means within 
the maritime border police offices to improve police surveillance capability in the south 
of Italy especially in south western coastline where a particular situation has occurred. 
43 vehicles were eventually procured.
2010
560 259


  	Decision No 574/2007/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 
May 2007 establishing the External Borders Fund for the period 2007 to 2013 as 
part of the General programme “Solidarity and Management of Migration Flows” 
(OJ L 144, 6.6.2007, p. 22).
  	Based on established practice in this area the term ‘Member States’ in this report 
is used to mean the countries participating in the EBF, regardless of whether they 
are EU Member States or Associated States.
 	Bulgaria and Romania have participated since 2010, as have three Associated 
States (Norway, Iceland and Switzerland). Liechtenstein has paid a contribution to 
the Fund since 2012 but waived the right to participate due to its lack of external 
borders and consulates. 
 	Commission Decision 2007/599/EC of 27 August 2007 implementing Decision 
No 574/2007/EC as regards the adoption of strategic guidelines for 2007 to 2013 
(OJ L 233, 5.9.2007, p. 3).
  	Complete and reliable information on Member States’ national expenditure on 
external border management is not available. 
  	Other elements of the SOLID programme are the European Refugee Fund (ERF); 
the European Fund for the integration of third-country nationals (EIF) and the 
European Return Fund. The EIF and ERF featured in the Court’s Special Report 
No 22/2012 “Do the European Integration Fund and European Refugee Fund 
contribute effectively to the integration of third-country nationals?” 
(htts://eca.europa.eu).
  	7,3 % of the Fund has been managed directly by the Commission. The directly 
managed parts of the EBF include the Community Actions, (including Emergency 
Actions) and Specific Actions.  
  	The Court’s Special Report No 22/2012 found that the three-authorities structure 
led to disproportionate administrative burden. For the 2014-2020 Justice and 
Home Affairs funds the Commission proposed to abolish the Certifying Authority.
  	Articles 28 and 29 of Decision No 574/2007/EC.
  	Article 32 of Decision No 574/2007/EC.
  	Article 31 of Decision No 574/2007/EC.
  	The management and control system of SOLID funds featured in SR No 22/2012. 
  	Greece, Spain, Italy, Malta and Poland. The selection of Member States was 
based on the EBF allocation, a risk assessment based on information from 
Commission audits and monitoring reports as well as information from Frontex, 
and on the need for a balance between the main external border risk areas in the 
Mediterranean and the eastern border since around 60 % of the EBF goes to the 
southern border (Mediterranean and Spain’s Canary Islands) and approximately 
25 % to the eastern border. Together the selected Member States represent 55 % 
of the total EBF allocation. 
  	The Schengen Evaluations are verifications that the Schengen rules are correctly 
applied by current and future Schengen States. The Schengen Evaluations were 
carried out by the Council as an intergovernmental process. Based on the 
adoption of Council Regulation (EU) No 1053/2013 of 7 October 2013 
establishing an evaluation and monitoring mechanism to verify the application of 
the Schengen acquis and repealing the Decision of the Executive Committee of 
16 September 1998 setting up a Standing Committee on the evaluation and 
implementation of Schengen (OJ L 295, 6.11.2013, p. 27) the Commission will 
take the lead role.
  	Three Emergency Actions projects, two other Community Actions projects, two 
Specific Action projects.
  	In the framework of the Court’s 2013 Statement of Assurance.
  	 Regulation (EU) No 515/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 
16 April 2014 establishing, as part of the Internal Security Fund, the instrument for 
financial support for external borders and visa and repealing Decision 
No 574/2007/EC (OJ L 150, 20.5.2014, p. 143).
 	A proposal for fuel vouchers was accepted by the Commission although contrary 
to the guidelines issued to Member States at the time. These guidelines were 
amended retrospectively in 2012.
  	Member States’ projects Nos 2, 9, 19, 21, 22 in the Annex.
  	Member States’ project No 25 in the Annex.
  	Article 3(1)(b) of Decision No 574/2007/EC.
  	According to the final reports of Greece’s annual programmes. 
  	Four of the five Member States selected for the Court’s audit are Cohesion Fund 
countries.
 	For example a specific priority on the purchase of equipment stated that the need 
for such equipment had to be “clearly identified at European level”. However the 
Court found that the meaning of this requirement was not clear to the Commission 
or Member States.
  	Of the estimated 330 million euro cost of developing national systems, the EBF 
contributed 95 million euro.
  	Court of Auditors SR No 3/2014 “Lessons from the European Commission’s 
development of the second generation Schengen Information System (SIS II)” 
(http://eca.europa.eu).
  	For example, 110 handheld devices (50 Personal Digital Assistants (PDAs) 
financed out of AP 2007 and 60 out of 2008) could not be used by police patrols to 
connect to SIS II because the planned security solution was not practicable and 
SIS II was not ready. In 2014 the Maltese authorities were working on resolving 
this problem.
 	The practice of submitting further visa applications to other EU Member States 
when a first application has been rejected.
 	Project No 3 (Internal transportation of migrants (SHIFTS).
  	Project No 2 (Reinforcement of transportation means to patrol the border crossing 
points area and the area close to the CIE (RECARS)) under Emergency Actions, 
see Annex.
  	C.I.E. and C.A.R.A are located throughout Italy both in coastal areas and inland.
  	See Articles 3 and 4 of Decision No 574/2007/EC and Commission note to the 
SOLID Committee 18 October 2010.
  	Risk analysis model developed by Frontex and Member States, used by Frontex 
and recommended for Member States’ use.
  	For example the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF).
  	For example US support for border management projects.
 	Member States’ projects Nos 7, 8, 9, 11 and 12 in the Annex.
  	Report to the Government of Greece on the visit to Greece carried out by the 
European Committee for  the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading 
Treatment or Punishment (CPT) from 23 to 29 September 2008 (CPT/INF 
(2009)20).
  	The figures shown for Greece are those verified and reported by the RA. They have not been approved by the Commission yet.