
Special Report No 2/2010 
(pursuant to Article 287(4), second subparagraph, TFEU)

The effectiveness of the Design Studies and Construction of New 
Infrastructures support 
schemes under the Sixth Framework Programme for Research








	TABLE OF CONTENTS
	
	Paragraph
Executive summary	I - IV
Introduction	1 - 17
EU research budget co-finances research infrastructures	3 - 13
Design Studies	8 - 9
Construction of New Infrastructures	10
Selection of projects	11 - 13
Research facilities can also be co-financed by the Structural Funds	14 
Some changes in the Commission’s approach for FP7	15 - 17
Audit scope and approach	18 - 20
Observations	21 - 43
The Design Studies scheme	21 - 24
Objectives mainly achieved	21 - 24
The Construction of New Infrastructures (CNI) scheme	25 - 36
The catalysing effect and European added value	25 - 28
Little ‘catalysing effect’…	29 - 35
…but CNI support resulted in the purchase of additional or better 
equipment	36
Complementarity of funding	37 - 43
The Commission advocated complementary funding 
but took only limited action	37 - 43
Conclusions and recommendations	44 - 47
Was the DS scheme a useful tool for decision makers?	45
Did the CNI scheme catalyse the construction of new infrastructures?	46
Did the Commission take action on complementary funding?	47
Annex I - Achievements of "Design Studies" projects
Annex II - EU contribution for CNI projects

The Commission’s replies



EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
I.	The Design Studies (DS) and Construction of New Infrastructures (CNI) 
support schemes form part of the EU policy on the development of high-
level 
research infrastructures of a European dimension. The contribution to 
projects 
under the 6th Framework Programme (FP6) for Research (2002-2006) 
amounted to 140 million euro.
II.	The audit examined whether the two schemes had promoted the 
development of a fabric of research infrastructures of the highest 
quality and 
performance in Europe, and their optimum use on a European scale based on 
the needs expressed by the research community. The audit analysed in 
particular, if the DS scheme had been useful to decision makers and if 
the CNI 
scheme had resulted in the construction of new infrastructures. Attention 
was 
also given to actions taken to encourage the use of complementary funding 
for 
research facilities.
III.	The Court concluded that: 
-	the DS scheme was positively viewed by the representatives of the 
research community interviewed, providing in their view, critical early 
stage 
funding for infrastructure development and encouraging collaboration 
amongst would be competitors in the European research field; and
-	Community support for the construction of new infrastructures had a 
limited 
impact on the emergence of a fabric of research facilities in Europe. The 
CNI scheme had little catalysing effect and, although the payment of CNI 
support led to some technical upgrading of the investment projects 
concerned, most projects supported would have gone ahead with or 
without Community support;
-	the Commission’s services did not actively promote the use of 
different 
funding sources available for research infrastructures in Europe despite 
advocating such use in various official pronouncements. 
IV.	The Court recommends that the Commission should reconsider whether 
CNI projects should be funded from the research budget given the findings 
concerning European added value. Furthermore, scheme objectives should be 
clear and realistic. The Commission should consider what is to be 
achieved 
through the use of complementary funding sources and if it believes that 
synergies can be obtained to make better use of EU funds, it should take 
the 
necessary actions. 


INTRODUCTION
1.	This report covers EU expenditure on Design Studies (DS) and 
Construction of New Infrastructures (CNI) support schemes under the 
Research Infrastructures (RI) activity area of the 6th Framework 
Programme 
(FP6) for Research (2002-2006). 
2.	The term “research infrastructures” refers to facilities and 
resources 
providing essential services to the research community in academic and/or 
industrial areas. The infrastructure may take the form of a single 
resource at a 
single location, a network of distributed resources or even be “virtual”, 
with the 
service being provided electronically .
EU research budget co-finances research infrastructures
3.	Community Research and Technological Development (RTD) activities 
have been financed since 1984 through multiannual framework programmes, 
which set out the scientific and technological objectives to be followed 
for a 
programming period. Specific support for research facilities started with 
the 2nd 
Framework Programme (FP2) (1987-1991). The initial aim was to improve 
access for the scientific community to national research infrastructures 
but this 
was subsequently broadened to also include support for cooperation 
networks 
and for research activities to improve the quality and quantity of 
services 
provided by the infrastructures as well as for the development of new 
scientific 
equipment . Since FP2, financial support has increased considerably (see 
Figure 1).


Figure 1 - Spending on the Research Infrastructures programmes
 
Source: European Commission.
4.	The overall objective of the RI activity area of FP6 was to promote 
the 
development in Europe of a ”fabric of research infrastructures of the 
highest 
quality and performance”. This was to be based upon the needs expressed 
by 
the research community and with “European Added Value” being created 
through the extension of the use of such infrastructures throughout 
Europe.
5.	According to a Commission analysis carried out in 2000 the 
development of 
state-of-the-art research facilities in Europe was hampered by:
-	a lack of coordinated mechanisms for needs assessment and setting of 
priorities across countries and disciplines; 
-	a lack of a coherent, European position on the participation in 
world-scale 
undertakings;
-	the difficulty to establish multinational funding agreements;
-	obstacles to transnational access to facilities; and
-	a low level of coordination among infrastructure operators and the 
consequent lack of critical mass in the technological development related 
to infrastructures .
6.	To help resolve known difficulties in the setting up of new research 
facilities 
the Commission proposed for FP6 an approach centred on support for large 
scale research facilities in Europe. Five support schemes were defined 
covering:
-	Transnational Access,
-	Integrating Activities,
-	Communication Network Development,
-	Design Studies, 
-	Construction of New Infrastructures.
7.	For FP6, a budget of 140 million of the 715 million euro available 
for 
infrastructure support was allocated to the DS and CNI support schemes 
(see 
the overview in Figure 2). 


Figure 2 - “Design Studies” and “Construction of New Infrastructures” 
schemes 
in FP6
 
Design Studies
8.	Design studies projects are intended to test the feasibility of 
potential future 
research facilities (including the development of new equipment). The DS 
scheme was to support feasibility studies and technical preparatory work 
for 
new infrastructures which were to have a clear European dimension and 
interest. Support could also be given to facilities of world-wide 
relevance 
located outside Europe but in which European organisations intended to 
participate.
9.	The DS projects audited by the Court (see Annex I) deal with topics 
such 
as free electron light sources, accelerator/colliders, large optical and 
infrared 
telescopes and the construction of aquaculture centres. An example of a 
design study can be found in Textbox 1.
Textbox 1 - The SKADS project
One of the objectives of the ‘Square Kilometre Array Design Study’ 
(SKADS) was to 
develop cost-effective technology for future radio astronomy. The total 
amount of EU 
financial support was 10,4 million euro, approximately one third of the 
total cost of the 
project. The grant contractor, SKADS consortium, was composed of 26 
participants 
from nine EU Member States, South Africa, Canada, Australia and Russia. 
This design study confirmed that the Square Kilometre Array (SKA), a 
giant 
radiotelescope distributed over several continents, could be built using 
simpler and 
cheaper structures than the hundreds of conventional dish antennae 
originally 
foreseen. 
Subsequently the SKA project was included in the ‘European Roadmap for 
Research 
Infrastructures’ (see paragraphs 16 and 17). Its Phase 1 construction is 
planned for 
2012-2016.

Construction of New Infrastructures
10.	The objective of the CNI scheme was to support the development of new 
or 
enhanced infrastructures. As with Design Studies, support could also be 
given 
to facilities of world-wide relevance located outside Europe but in which 
European organisations intended to participate. Eligible projects could 
take the 
form of traditional buildings but could also include for example a system 
of 
antennae in the Atacama desert in Chile or a virtual infrastructure, such 
as a 
distributed digitised archive to improve linguistic research (see Annex 
II for CNI 
projects audited). An example of a CNI project is given in Textbox 2.
Textbox 2 - CeMaCE project
The Tjärnö Marine Biological Laboratory (TMBL) is a marine biology field 
station in 
Sweden. Together with Akademiska Hus, Sweden’s main owner of university 
property, 
the TMBL is building the Centre for Marine Chemical Ecology (CeMaCE). 
This 
multidisciplinary facility will provide European researchers with access 
to laboratories, 
equipment and scientific expertise. The Centre, with a direct access to 
the sea from 
the banks of Koster fjord, integrates molecular biology, ecology and 
evolutionary 
biology – a combination that should provide an innovative approach to 
marine 
ecological chemistry. 
The European financial support for this project, amounting to over 900 
000 euro, was 
mainly used for the construction of a marine ecotron – a facility 
offering ecologically 
relevant experimental conditions with control of several environmental 
factors – and 
contributes to the creation of marine ecology laboratories. The overall 
costs of the 
project amounted to 9 million euro.
Selection of projects
11.	DS and CNI projects under FP6 were selected following a call for 
proposals 
published in November 2003 . The maximum rate of co-financing for DS and 
CNI projects under FP6 was 50 % and 10 % respectively. The call was open 
to 
projects in any field of science and technology and the Commission 
received 
121 proposals, in total amounting to 387 million euro. As the Commission, 
in 
agreement with the Programme Committee composed of representatives of the 
Member States and Associated States, considered that many good proposals 
would be excluded if the call’s indicative budget of 70 million euro  was 
maintained, it increased the budget for this call to 140 million euro. 
12.	The project proposals were evaluated by a multi-disciplinary panel of 
62 
independent experts according to four criteria:
-	European added value;
-	scientific and technological excellence; 
-	relevance to the objectives of the scheme; and 
-	quality of the management. 
13.	Seventy-seven projects were judged as being of an appropriate 
standard 
and thirty projects received financial support, with 92 million euro 
being 
awarded for 19 Design Studies and 48 million euro for nine CNI projects . 
Research facilities can also be co-financed by the Structural Funds 
14.	In addition to funding from the research budget managed by the 
Commission, under the various Framework Programmes, the development of 
research facilities can also be financed through the EU’s Structural 
Funds 
which are financed by the EU budget but managed by Member States. As a 
source of potential funding, the 3 billion euro available under the 
”Research, 
Technological Development and Innovation (RTDI) Infrastructure” area of 
the 
Structural Funds for the 2000-2006 period was significantly greater than 
the 
715 million euro allocated for research infrastructures under FP6. Figure 
3 
presents the amounts involved and the maximum co-financing rates relevant 
to 
the various sources of funding. 


Figure 3 - Structural Funds and RTD framework programmes – a comparison 

FP6
SF 2000-2006
FP7
SF 2007-2013





Programming period
2002-2006
2000-2006
2007-2013
2007-2013
Budget for RTDI ( million 
euro)
17 883
38 815
53 272
49 744





Budget for RTDI 
infrastructures ( million euro)
715
3 128
1 715
9 758
Eligibility
EU and 
Associated 
Countries
Objective 1: 2 412  
Objective 2: 681   
Community initiative: 
35
EU and 
Associated 
Countries
Convergence regions: 7 363 
Regional competitiveness 
and employment regions: 
2 247 European territorial 
cooperation: 148
Maximum co-financing rates
DS: 50 %                         
CNI: 10 %
Objective 1: 75 % - 
85 %  other 
objectives: 50 %
DS:50 %  
CNI: 3-6 million 
euro per project 
Convergence regions: 75  % 
- 85 %  
Regional competitiveness 
and employment regions: 
50 % - 85 %  
European territorial 
cooperation: 75 % - 85 %

Some changes in the Commission’s approach for FP7
15.	The 7th Framework Programme (FP7)  (2007-2013), introduces some 
changes in the area of Research Infrastructures in comparison to FP6. The 
approach adopted for the DS scheme has generally remained unchanged but 
changes have been made to the CNI scheme in the area of project selection 
and a shift of funding emphasis from the construction to the preparatory 
phase.
16.	For project selection,the FP7 approach is more “top-down” and the 
projects 
selected for support are mainly those included in the “European roadmap 
for 
new research infrastructures”. This is a list prepared by the European 
Strategy 
Forum on Research Infrastructures (ESFRI). 
17.	ESFRI is a forum which seeks to provide a coherent approach to 
research 
policy-making in Europe and is composed of appointees of the Ministers 
responsible for research in the Member States and Associated States and a 
Commission representative. The “Roadmap” sets out the scientific needs in 
the 
area of research infrastructures in Europe for a 10-20 year period and 
identifies 
projects considered as being vital to the development of science and 
innovation 
in Europe. 
AUDIT SCOPE AND APPROACH
18.	 The purpose of the audit was to assess the CNI and DS funding 
schemes 
and their contribution to the achievement of the objectives of the RI 
activity 
during the FP6 period (2002-2006).
19.	The audit approached this through the following questions:
(a)	Did the Design Studies scheme result in feasibility studies and 
preparatory 
work which were useful to decision makers in the creation of new research 
infrastructures?
(b)	Did the CNI scheme effectively catalyse the construction of new 
infrastructures?
(c)	Did the Commission take action to promote the use of complementary 
funding, as included in the FP6 decision, within the DS and CNI schemes?
20.	The audit involved:
-	an analysis of the legal basis of the RI area and specifically the 
establishment of the DS and CNI schemes;
-	a review of the project selection and monitoring procedures 
(including all 
relevant evaluation reports);
-	interviews with staff of the Commission and with representatives of 
the 
principal European research organisations and of research ministries in 
eight 
Member States (Belgium, Czech Republic, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, 
Poland, Sweden and the United Kingdom);
-	on-the-spot audits of a sample of nine of 19 Design Studies and all 
nine CNI 
projects; and
-	an on-line survey of all unsuccessful applicants.
The audited period was that of FP6 (2002 to 2006). The audited projects 
are 
listed in Annex I and II.
OBSERVATIONS
The Design Studies scheme 
Objectives mainly achieved
21.	The objective of the Design Studies scheme was to contribute to 
feasibility 
studies and technical preparatory work for new infrastructures with a 
clear 
European dimension. The scheme was judged by the Court as being 
successful if:
-	EU funding facilitated studies which led, in the medium-to-long term, 
to the 
enhancement of a fabric of research facilities of a European dimension 
and;
-	the co-financed studies exhibited European added value.
22.	Following the various audit interviews carried out, the Court noted 
that 
participants generally had a positive view of the Design Studies scheme 
and 
thought that the existence of a ‘Design study’ resulted in an increased 
level of 
awareness and support on the part of national decision-makers. A majority 
of 
the projects were subsequently included in the ESFRI list (see paragraphs 
16 
and 17), increasing the likelihood of construction (see Figure 4). 



Figure 4 - Development of the nine DS projects audited by the Court
 
23.	During interviews, project coordinators and Member States’ 
representatives 
also stated that Community support for Design Studies had been of 
importance 
in bridging the gap between the elaboration of an idea and the actual 
implementation of a project. The support had given scientists an 
opportunity to 
demonstrate and work out their proposals in a structured way. Most 
project 
coordinators were also of the opinion that the possibility for a number 
of 
institutions to collaborate together in joint undertakings was a valuable 
and 
worthwhile aspect of this support scheme. Textbox 3 contains an example 
of 
cooperation between major European research institutions who otherwise 
would have been competitors.
Textbox 3 - the EUROFEL project 
The EUROFEL Design Study was a joint effort on the part of 16 European 
research 
institutions to prepare for the construction of the next-generation of 
free-electron laser 
light sources, to be built as a distributed infrastructure in seven 
European centres. 
Originally, there were seven different, competing projects for 
constructing free electron 
lasers in five European countries. However the Commission advised the 
individual 
institutions to submit a joint proposal thereby enhancing European 
collaboration in the 
area. For some participants, the main benefit of the project was the 
collaboration of 
different institutions, which would normally be competing against each 
other.
The success of the Design Study can be gauged from the inclusion of the 
construction 
project in the ‘European Roadmap for Research Infrastructures’ and is 
scheduled to be 
constructed in the next eight to 12 years.

24.	Beneficiaries and the representatives of research organisations 
stated that, 
in terms of securing funding, the design phase of an infrastructure 
project is the 
most difficult one. This is especially the case when international co-
operation is 
necessary. The DS scheme, with a financial involvement of the Commission 
of 
up to 50 % of total cost, was therefore considered by interviewees as 
being 
important in that it provided a framework for the development of large-
scale 
European projects. The interviewees thought that pan-European 
collaboration 
is difficult to set-up through mechanisms with a more national or 
regional 
programme emphasis.
The Construction of New Infrastructures (CNI) scheme
The catalysing effect and European added value
25.	The criteria for the payment of EU funds under the Construction of 
New 
Infrastructures (CNI) scheme are insufficiently specific. Council 
Decision 
2002/835/EC  stipulates that the scheme was to provide the minimum 
funding 
necessary ‘to catalyse’ the activity, with most of the construction and 
operational costs assured by national or other sources of finance. A 
catalyst is 
something that accelerates or promotes a reaction or process. In the 
Court’s 
understanding, this implies that the payment of CNI funding should result 
in 
projects going ahead which would otherwise not have been undertaken. 
26.	Decision 2002/835/EC goes on to say that funding should be provided 
on 
the basis of a detailed justification ‘based on European added value’. 
The 
Commission’s 2002-2003 work programme for FP6, interprets the CNI 
eligibility 
requirement to say that CNI support will be available ‘where such support 
could 
have a critical catalysing effect in terms of European added value’. This 
could 
be demonstrated, as mentioned in the work programme, in terms of an 
improved attractiveness for, and/or improved services to, the research 
community in Europe, by way of: 
-	a wider accessibility of the proposed infrastructure, 
-	a more advanced technology, 
-	a more flexible adaptability to interdisciplinary studies, 
-	a better connectivity to the research community.
27.	The Court examined all  CNI projects and considered how the 
Commission 
had applied the above mentioned eligibility requirements set out in 
Decision 
2002/835/EC and elaborated on in the Commission’s 2002-2003 work 
programme.
28.	In the important matter of the access of European researchers to 
infrastructures, the Court found that Commission financing focused on the 
funding of the construction or the purchase of equipment without 
sufficiently 
securing access for researchers. 
Little ‘catalysing effect’…
29.	In order to assess whether Construction of New Infrastructures (CNI) 
support had a ‘catalysing effect’ the Court examined:
-	the relationship between the starting date of projects and the date 
when 
contracts with the EU were signed, which would indicate the importance of 
the funding to the undertaking of the project;
-	whether the decision to grant or refuse funding for projects was 
determinant 
for the project going ahead or continuing; and
-	perceptions of the main stakeholders regarding the extent to which EU 
investment served as a catalyst for other investment in projects.
30.	The Court’s audit found that seven of the nine CNI projects had 
starting 
dates in advance of the relevant Commission decisions and subsequent 
signing of contracts. (see Figure 5). An eighth project started after the 
Commission decision but before the contract had been signed.
Figure 5 - Timeline of project start and contract signature
 
31.	As in most cases the projects were up-and-running before contracts 
were 
signed and as Community support for CNI projects was limited to a maximum 
of 10 % of the total project cost , there was no evidence that EU-funding 
was a 
determining factor in the decision as to whether projects went ahead or 
not 
(see example in Textbox 4).
Textbox 4 - Phase 1 of the DIRAC project
The aim of the construction of the International Accelerator Facility at 
the Darmstadt 
Ion Research and Antiproton Centre (DIRAC) in Darmstadt is to up-grade 
the existing 
accelerators for future research on the origin of the universe. This 
project, to be co-
financed by 14 partners (11 EU Member States, China, India and Russia), 
includes 
both new infrastructure (magnet) and upgrades of existing infrastructure 
(synchrotron 
accelerator and spectrometer). 
EU funding amounting to 10,4 million euro was intended to support the 
first phase of 
the project, which was estimated at 104 million euro. The total 
investment is expected 
to be in the region of 1,2 billion euro. When the contract with the 
Commission was 
signed, the project was already under way. 

32.	During interviews, the representatives of European research 
organisations 
and Member States’ ministries, stated that the CNI scheme did not 
“catalyse” 
the activities for which support was granted because of the low level of 
funding 
available and the fact that, by definition, the provision of only 10 % of 
total 
project cost, is insufficient for the production of a catalysing effect.
33.	A similar observation was made in the Evaluation Panel Report: “(…) 
the 
experts felt that EC funding was having a higher impact for Design 
Studies 
compared to Construction projects since the construction would happen 
anyway and the benefit of the 10 % help from the EU was sometimes not 
very 
clear.” .
34.	In replying to the audit survey, nine out of ten responding non-
successful 
applicants confirmed that the Commission’s decision on funding did not 
have a 
substantial influence on the realisation of projects and most of the 
applicants 
continued with their projects despite having been rejected, although 
sometimes 
with a reduction in scope (see Figure 6).
35.	When a similar question was put by the Court to the coordinators of 
successful CNI projects, three out of four replied that a negative 
decision of the 
Commission would not have prevented their projects from going ahead (see 
Figure 6 also).
Figure 6 - Implementation of successful and unsuccessful proposals
Have you proceeded with the 
implementation of the project despite 
the negative decision on EC funding?
Would a negative decision on EC 
funding have held up project 
implementation?
 
 
Survey of unsuccessful proposers
Interviews with project coordinators

…but CNI support resulted in the purchase of additional or better 
equipment
36.	Although EU funding, adding 10 % on top of project costs agreed at a 
national level, had little ‘catalysing effect’ so far as projects as a 
whole were 
concerned, it enabled the purchase or development of additional equipment 
not 
foreseen in the initial project proposal. This funding therefore 
complemented 
national funding and in this sense, EU funding allowed the 
infrastructures to 
have more or better technology. In some cases it also facilitated the 
interdisciplinary use of facilities. 
Complementarity of funding
The Commission advocated complementary funding but took only limited 
action
37.	As already mentioned in paragraph 14, in addition to funding 
infrastructures 
through the research budget, Community support can also come from the 
Structural Funds in support of regional and cohesion policies. The EIB 
may 
also finance research infrastructure projects which have a European 
dimension. 
38.	Double financing or submitting the same item of expenditure for 
support 
from different schemes is prohibited. The co-financing of a project from 
different 
EU financing mechanisms is rarely possible due to the specific rules on 
co-
financing for each instrument. The complementary use of funding sources 
is 
however allowed. Complementarity of funding means using different sources 
of 
funding for different project activities, which are carried out in a 
related or 
consecutive manner . 
39.	The possibility of using complementary funding from different 
European 
sources has been advocated in various Community documents. In its report 
of 
May 2000 , the European Parliament strongly encouraged the complementary 
use of funding under the Framework Research Programme and other 
Community policies, in particular the Structural Funds. The Commission’s 
Communication “Towards a European Research Area”  announced that, in the 
area of research infrastructures, the potential to combine Structural 
Funds, EIB 
loans and FP6 funding should be exploited.
40.	The use of complementary funding in respect of the DS and CNI schemes 
was also treated in the decisions establishing FP6  and the specific 
programme ‘Structuring the European Research Area’ . Design studies were 
to be undertaken on the basis of a systematic exploration of “the 
possibilities of 
contributions from other sources, including the EIB or the Structural 
Funds for 
the funding of these infrastructures”. Support from the CNI scheme “may 
supplement contributions from the EIB or the Structural Funds for the 
funding of 
these infrastructures”. The use of complementary funding was also 
mentioned 
in the Research Infrastructures Work Programme . 
41.	Combining the use of structural, cohesion and other funding sources, 
with 
research funding, is specifically intended to realise the potential of 
the EU’s 
convergence regions in terms of industrial and research development.
42.	Despite advocating the use of complementary sources of funding in the 
Decisions and documents mentioned above, the issue was not actively 
addressed by the Commission during FP6. There was no guidance material 
established to help project coordinators search for potential funding 
synergies 
and indeed no CNI projects benefited from either Structural Funds 
financing or 
EIB loans during the period. Most of the unsuccessful applicants surveyed 
stated that they had not been informed about the possibility of using 
complementary funding sources (see Figure 7). 
Figure 7 - Information on complementarity of funding – results from the 
ECA 
survey of unsuccessful applicants

 
43.	There would also be a need for practical steps to be taken by the 
Commission to adequately administer the complementarity aspect e.g. 
checks 
for double financing or ineligible co-financing. However it was noted 
that:
(i)	the relevant DGs ( RTD and REGIO ) did not establish a common 
definition of a “Research Infrastructure”,
(ii)	the two DGs did not have the means of cross-linking information on 
projects eligible for both FP6 and Structural Funds, and
(iii)	under Cohesion policy, no specific tools and databases to manage 
and 
coordinate the complementarity of funding have been developed. 
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
44.	 The Court considered the DS scheme to have mainly met its objectives 
whereas the CNI scheme was judged to have provided low added value.
Was the DS scheme a useful tool for decision makers?
45.	Representatives of the research community were generally positive 
about 
the Design Studies scheme. They thought that it provided an opportunity 
for 
scientific ideas to be developed in a structured way by testing the 
feasibility of 
potential future research facilities. The possibility provided for 
different 
institutions to collaborate together was particularly welcomed. The 
process 
helped decision makers identify which projects were worthy of support and 
the 
majority of the DS projects audited were included on the ESFRI list.
Did the CNI scheme catalyse the construction of new infrastructures?
46.	Funding through the CNI scheme did not have a determining effect on 
project implementation. Payment of CNI assistance made possible some 
technical upgrading of the investment projects concerned, with the 
acquisition 
of new or better equipment. However the CNI scheme did not result in the 
construction of new infrastructures but rather provided additional 
financing to 
projects which would have gone ahead irrespective of the existence of the 
scheme.

Recommendation 1
The Commission should reconsider whether in future Framework Programmes, 
CNI projects should be funded from the research budget given the Court’s 
findings concerning the European added value and catalysing effect. 
The Commission should ensure that scheme objectives are stated in terms 
that 
are clear and understandable to all and should be realistic given the 
intended 
level of project funding involved.  
Did the Commission take action on complementary funding?
47.	Despite including in the FP6 decision, the possibility of funding DS 
and CNI 
projects from complementary EU budgetary sources, the Commission did not 
actively promote this possibility and consequently it was not used.
Recommendation 2
The Commission should clarify what it intends to achieve by including in 
the 
legislation the possible complementary use of funds. It should consider 
the 
advantages and disadvantages of such funding and the associated costs and 
benefits. If it believes that useful synergies can be achieved through 
combining 
earmarked EU funds, EIB loans and national financing, it should actively 
promote the use of complementary funding sources, whilst ensuring that 
adequate controls are put in place to prevent and detect any misuse of 
this 
option.
This report was adopted by the Court of Auditors in Luxembourg at its 
meeting 
of 5 May 2010. 

For the Court of Auditors

Vítor Manuel da Silva Caldeira 
President

 	‘Support for Research Infrastructures in the FP6 Specific Programme 
on 
"Structuring the European Research Area" Work Programme 2002-2003’, p. 1.
 	Council Decision 1999/173/EC of 25 January 1999 adopting a specific 
programme for research, technological development and demonstration on 
improving the human research potential and the socio-economic knowledge 
base 
(1998-2002) (OJ L 64, 12.3.1999, p. 105).
 	See Working document of the Commission services “A European Research 
Area 
for Infrastructures”, SEC(2001) 356 of 27.2.2001.
 	Call for proposals FP6-2003-Infrastructures-4.
 	The evaluators noted, that “The oversubscription for this call was 
about six times 
the indicative budget (70 M€). Even on the level of very good proposals, 
according to the consensus marks, the oversubscription is two to three-
fold.”, Call 
FP6-2003-Infrastructures-4 Panel Report, 7 May 2004.
 	The call for proposals was also eligible for another category of 
projects (“accompanying measures”) which is not the subject of this 
audit. In this 
category two projects were selected.
 	Decision No 1982/2006/EC of the European Parliament and of the 
Council (OJ 
L 412, 30.12.2006, p. 1).
  	OJ L 294, 29.10.2002, p. 44.
 	CNI special clause No 34: “The reimbursement of costs for other 
specific support 
activities, incurred by contractors applying the FC, FCF or AC cost-
reporting 
models, shall not exceed 10 % of the total eligible costs”.
 	Research Infrastructures Action – Call FP6-2003-Infrastructures-4: 
Panel Report, 
p. 4.
 	“Competitive European regions through research and innovation. 
Practical Guide 
to EU funding opportunities for research and innovation”, Rev. 2 
02/12/2008, 
pp. 12-13.
 	Report on the Communication from the Commission "Towards a European 
research area" (COM(2000) 6 – C5-0115/2000 – 2000/2075(COS)).
 	“… the opportunity should be taken to negotiate on the structural 
assistance 
planned for the years 2000 to 2006 in order to examine how best to 
combine 
projects implemented within this framework (i.e. Structural Funds) with 
projects 
undertaken in the European programmes.” COM(2000) 6, p. 18.
  	Decision No 1513/2002/EC of the European Parliament and of the 
Council (OJ 
L 232, 29.8.2002, p. 1).
 	Council Decision 2002/835/EC of 30 September 2002 adopting a specific 
programme for research, technological development and demonstration: 
”Structuring the European Research Area” (2002–2006).
 	Work Programme (2002-2003): Support for Research Infrastructures in 
the FP6 
Specific Programme on "Structuring the European Research Area", first 
update 
June 2003.
