Special Report No 6/2014
(pursuant to Article 287(4), second subparagraph, TFEU)

Cohesion policy funds support to renewable energy generation - 
has it achieved good results?
 
together with the Commission replies



	CONTENTS
	
	Paragraph
Glossary and abbreviations
Executive summary	I-VIII
Introduction	1-11
Renewable energy	1-3
EU Policy Objectives – the 2020 renewable energy target	4-6
Barriers to renewable energy	7
Financial Support for renewable energy by the Cohesion policy	8
Shared management	9-11
Audit scope and approach	12-13
Observations	14-47
Audited projects delivering outputs as planned …	14-16
The overall picture is one of well-planned projects 
delivering according to plan	14-16
… but encountering some difficulties in implementation	17-21
There is scope for further improvement at all project  
stages - from procurement through operations to monitoring  
and evaluation	17-21
… and results not properly measured or projects not   
attaining their energy generation targets in the majority of cases	22-25
RES data collection and reporting can be improved	22-23
Project results not always achieved	24-25
The principle of cost-effectiveness is not fully considered in  
planning the RES projects	26-31
Cost-effectiveness - an important objective in EU spending	26-27
There is scope for an emphasis on cost-effectiveness at an  
early stage	28-31
… and there is also scope for more cost-effective 
RES generation projects	32-40
Cohesion policy funds having limited EU added value - the  
RES projects did not make their full contribution to the EU’s energy 
objectives	41-47
Conclusions and recommendations	48-54


Annex I - Overview of Member States’ progress towards the 2020 RES target
Annex II - Cohesion policy (ERDF and CF 2007-2013) funds allocation to RES 
and selected projects 2007-2012
Annex III - List of audited RES generation projects
Annex IV - Summary evaluation of RES project results
Replies of the Commission



GLOSSARY AND ABBREVIATIONS
CF: Cohesion Fund
Concept of cost-effectiveness: It concerns the ability or potential of an 
audited entity, activity, programme or operation to achieve certain outcomes at 
a reasonable cost. Cost-effectiveness analyses are studies of the relationship 
between project cost and outcomes, expressed as cost per unit of outcome 
achieved . The concept is also emphasised in the EU’s financial rules (see 
paragraph 6). 
CO2: Carbone dioxide
Deadweight: Deadweight occurs where funding is provided to support a 
beneficiary who would have made the same choice in the absence of aid. In 
such cases, the outcome cannot be attributed to the policy, and the aid paid to 
the beneficiary has had no direct impact. 
EIA: Environmental Impact Assessment
ERDF: European Regional Development Fund
EU added value: On a general level, EU added value is the value resulting 
from an EU intervention which is additional to the value that would have been 
otherwise created by Member State action alone.
Feed-in tariff (FIT):  A policy mechanism designed to accelerate investment in 
renewable energy technologies by offering long-term contracts to renewable 
energy producers, typically based on the cost of generation of each technology. 
MS: Member State
PV: Photovoltaic
RES: Renewable energy sources - energy from renewable non-fossil sources, 
namely wind, solar, aerothermal, geothermal, hydrothermal and ocean energy, 
hydropower, biomass, landfill gas, sewage treatment plant gas and biogases:
*	Geothermal energy means energy stored in the form of heat beneath the 
surface of solid earth.
*	Biomass means the biodegradable fraction of products, waste and 
residues from biological origin from agriculture (including vegetal and 
animal substances), forestry and related industries including fisheries and 
aquaculture, as well as the biodegradable fraction of industrial and 
municipal waste.
*	Solar energy means radiant light and heat from the sun harnessed using a 
range of technologies such as solar heating, solar photovoltaic  and solar 
thermal electricity.
*	Wind power means the conversion of wind energy into a useful form of 
energy, such as using wind turbines to make electrical power.
*	Hydro energy is the conversion of kinetic energy derived from the falling 
and running water into electrical energy.
RES Directive: Directive 2009/28/EC of 23 April 2009 on the promotion of 
energy from renewable sources and amending and subsequently repealing 
Directives 2001/77/EC and 2003/30/EC.
RES 2020 targets: Directive 2009/28/EC on renewable energy, to be  
implemented by Member States by December 2010, set mandatory national 
targets for all Member States so that by 2020 the EU will achieve a share of 
20 % of energy from renewable sources in general and of 10 % in the transport 
sector particularly. 

Measurement of energy units:
-	GW, MW, KW – Giga/Mega/Kilo watt
-	GWh, KWh, MWh – Giga/Mega/Kilo watt hour
-	kWp - kilowatts-peak – nominal power of the PV module


EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
I.	This audit sought to answer the question of whether good results had been 
achieved by the two most important funding sources among EU spending 
programmes for promoting renewable energy - the European Regional 
Development Fund and the Cohesion Fund (Cohesion policy funds).
II.	Approximately 4,7 billion euro was allocated for renewable energy in the 
2007 - 2013 programming period. The Court examined whether funds in that 
period had been allocated to well prioritised, cost-effective and mature 
renewable energy generation projects with rational objectives and to what 
extent these funds had achieved good results in contributing to the EU 2020 
target for energy from renewable sources (RES).
III.	The Court found that the 24 audited  RES generation projects delivered 
outputs as planned. Most of the audited RES projects were sufficiently mature 
and ready for implementation when selected. There were no major cost 
overruns or time delays in the projects and the RES generation capacities were 
installed as planned and operational. No major risks to their technical 
sustainability were apparent.
IV.	In one third of the audited projects the energy production targets had been 
achieved (or almost achieved) and properly measured.  The Court found that 
the overall value for money of Cohesion policy funds support to RES 
generation projects has been limited in helping achieve the EU RES 2020 
target, because:
*	cost-effectiveness has not been the guiding principle in planning and 
implementing the RES generation projects, and
*	cohesion policy funds had a limited EU added value.
V.	In more detail, the Court found potential for improvements in the Member 
States covered by the audit: some procurement processes did not ensure full 
transparency, fairness and efficiency in contractors’ selection; preparation was 
insufficient for effective monitoring and evaluation; programmes did not explain 
how the EU funds could contribute cost-effectively to reaching the RES 
objectives; cost-effectiveness of measures in different RES sectors was not 
always considered when the budgets were earmarked; and the programmes 
failed to establish performance indicators for monitoring and evaluation.
VI.	The Court concludes that improvements are needed if funding under these 
programmes is to make the maximum possible contribution to achieving the 
RES 2020 targets.
VII.	Cohesion policy spending, in general, brings benefits to the broader 
economy, and although the direct measurement of economic growth or job 
creation - the overarching aims of Cohesion policy - was outside the scope of 
this audit, the Court’s observations and recommendations are also made in the 
context of these policy aims.
VIII.	In view of a likely enhanced use of EU funds for promoting RES in the 
2014 – 2020 programming period, the Court makes the following 
recommendations:
Recommendation 1
The Commission, through guidance setting for programme and project 
preparation and selection as well as through conditions for making funding 
available for RES generation investments, should:
*	ensure that future Cohesion policy co-funded RES programmes are guided 
by the principle of cost-effectiveness, including the avoidance of 
deadweight. Programmes must be based on proper needs assessment, 
prioritisation of the most cost-effective technologies (while not discriminating 
between RES sectors) and optimal contribution to the EU RES 2020 target. 
Adequate RES generation objectives in relation to the budget as well as 
project selection criteria with a focus on the cost-effectiveness of the energy 
generation results (avoiding over-compensation of projects) need to be set; 
*	promote the establishment by the Member States of a stable and 
predictable regulatory framework for RES in general, along with smoother 
procedures for the integration of electricity from RES into the grid networks.
Recommendation 2
The Member States should establish and apply, based on Commission 
guidance, minimum cost-effectiveness criteria which are adapted to the 
projects’ circumstances. They should also enhance the added value of 
Cohesion policy funds by improving RES project implementation as well as 
monitoring and evaluation and by building a stock of measured data about 
energy generation costs in all relevant RES sectors.


INTRODUCTION
Renewable energy
1.	Energy from renewable sources (RES) is important for improving the 
security of energy supply in the EU and for reducing the EU’s dependence on 
conventional (fossil) fuels and imported energy, and for reducing greenhouse 
gas emissions. Electricity and heat can be generated from a range of 
resources, from the sun (concentrated solar power or photovoltaic power), wind 
(onshore or offshore), water (large, small or micro hydro), earth (geothermal for 
electricity or heat) and biomass (solid, liquid, landfill gas and biodegradable 
fraction of industrial and municipal waste, and liquid biofuels).
2.	RES also have an important role to play in reducing carbon dioxide (CO2) 
emissions and enhancing environmental sustainability. Moreover, the 
development of RES technologies has a potential to boost Europe’s economy, 
industrial competitiveness and employment. RES are expected to be 
economically competitive with conventional energy sources in the medium to 
long term .
3.	The development of renewable energy is laid out in the Article 194(1) of the 
Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union in the context of the 
establishment and functioning of the internal market and the need to preserve 
and improve the environment.
EU Policy Objectives – the 2020 renewable energy target
4.	Already in 1997, the EU had declared a 12 % RES target by 2010. The 
Council of the European Union (the Council) set a binding EU target of 20 % in 
RES in gross final energy consumption by 2020, based on the Commission’s 
Renewable Energy Roadmap which lays down a pathway for mainstreaming 
RES into EU energy policies and markets (see Annex I concerning the national 
2020 RES targets)  . The Renewable Energy Directive adopted in 2009 
constitutes  a legally binding framework for the promotion of RES until 2020 :
*	Apart from setting the overall 20 % binding target for the EU and binding 
national targets of between 10 and 49 % by 2020 it improves the 
framework for promoting RES electricity (e.g. by introducing requirements 
for the Member States concerning access to the electricity grid and 
simplification of administrative procedures).
*	It required the Member States to develop national action plans that 
establish roadmaps for the development of RES and created cooperation 
mechanisms between the Member States to help achieve the RES target 
cost-effectively. 
5.	The Member States are required to ensure that their share of RES equals or 
exceeds indicative trajectories to reach the RES 2020 target. They must report 
every two years to the Commission on implementation of the Directive and 
progress towards their individual targets. RES measures are to be introduced in 
a cost-effective way . The Commission must produce, by 31 December 2014, a 
progress report on the implementation of the RES Directive . 
6.	In addition, the EU’s financial rules stipulate that the cost-effectiveness 
principle must be an important determinant of public spending decisions . 
Moreover, the European Parliament noted the need to identify the most cost-
effective RES and cost-optimal policies for realising the potential of RES . 
According to the Commission’s latest progress report  the EU’s RES 2020 
target will likely be exceeded as a whole, whereas not all Member States were 
on track in 2012 to reach their binding national targets, see Annex I. Following 
its Green Paper in 2013, the Commission laid out initial considerations for the 
Union’s climate and energy policy for the period from 2020 to 2030, proposing 
a binding EU target of 27 % for RES .
Barriers to renewable energy
7.	Apart from exogenous factors (such as evolution of energy prices or access 
to loans) multiple sector-specific obstacles hamper investments in RES 
throughout the Union and have not yet been eliminated by the Member States 
and the Commission :
*	Institutional and legal barriers, e.g. the priority given at EU level to energy 
issues is not always reflected at local, regional and national level whereby 
a lack of clear implementation strategies and flexibility in the relevant 
administrations or the national legal regimes as well as unclear legislative 
and contractual frameworks standing in the way of promoting RES; 
complex authorisation and permitting procedures for planning, building and 
operating RES installations together with environmental requirements 
discouraging project promoters to come up with feasible project proposals 
(lack of an effective administrative system)
*	Difficulties in integrating RES electricity in the transmission or distribution 
grids (technical problems, insufficient infrastructure, discriminatory 
practices preventing grid access, distribution of costs among the grid 
operators, government and project promoters and a lack of measuring of 
energy generation)
*	Non-stable or non-predictable promotion and incentive regimes and a lack 
of information for suppliers, customers and installers hampering the use of 
cost-effective technologies.
Financial Support for renewable energy by the Cohesion policy
8.	Cohesion policy instruments - the European Regional Development Fund 
(ERDF) and the Cohesion Fund (CF) - are the most important funding source 
among the EU spending programmes  for promoting renewable energy. While 
during the 2000-2006 programming period only 600 million euro had supported 
projects in this sector, approximately 4,7 billion euro was allocated to 
renewable energy in the 2007-2013 programming period, reflecting a much 
higher importance to this policy area (see Annex II for the breakdown by 
Member States). In the 2014-2020 programming period, Cohesion Policy 
support to the shift towards a low-carbon economy will further increase and 
may reach at least 27 billion euro from the ERDF . Further support can also be 
provided through the Cohesion Fund.
Box 1 – Cohesion policy spending for RES - key facts
270,8 billion euro - total ERDF / CF allocations for 2007–2013
0,6 billion euro - total ERDF / CF allocations to RES for 2000–2006
4,7 billion euro - total ERDF / CF allocations to RES for  2007–2013
at least 27 billion euro - estimated minimum ERDF allocations to supporting the shift 
towards a low-carbon economy, including RES, for 2014–2020. Further allocations 
could also be made from the Cohesion Fund (footnote 14)

Shared management
9.	In the framework of Cohesion policy the Member States draft the individual 
operational programmes, set up and operate their management and control 
systems and issue annual implementation reports to the Commission. 
Moreover, as part of the day-to-day management, national or regional bodies 
select the projects and are responsible for their implementation and evaluation. 
10.	Managing authorities, intermediate bodies and certifying authorities are in 
charge of managing the implementation of the operational programmes . 
Project funding is subject to rules and conditions laid down partly at EU  and 
partly at Member State level (project selection; project cost, benefit and 
earnings assessments; and also economic, social and environmental impact 
assessments are responsibilities of the Member States’ authorities).
11.	The Commission issues guidelines for drawing up operational programmes, 
approves the operational programmes and supervises the setting up and the 
operation of systems in the Member States. In particular, it monitors the 
implementation of the operational programmes essentially through the 
implementation reports received and through participation in monitoring 
committees. In addition to annual implementation reports, the Commission may 
request specific programme information and ‘project selection’ data from the 
managing authorities.
AUDIT SCOPE AND APPROACH
12.	The audit sought to answer the question whether the ERDF and CF projects 
investing in renewable energy generation had achieved good results. In this 
regard, multiple audit criteria were developed (see Annex IV) which were 
based on different sources and studies, including such by the Commission’s 
services. The Court examined whether the audited projects were implemented 
and delivered outputs as planned and whether they attained their energy 
generation targets. The audit analysed in particular whether the funds in the 
operational programmes in the 2007-2013 programming period had been 
allocated to well prioritised, cost-effective and mature renewable energy 
generation projects with rational objectives and the extent of the projects’ 
contribution in achieving the 2020 RES target. 
13.	The audit results were derived from an examination of 24 completed 
renewable energy generation projects from nine Operational Programmes 
financed through the ERDF or the CF in Austria, Finland, Malta, Poland and the 
United Kingdom . The projects were in the biomass, photovoltaic (PV), solar 
thermal and wind energy sectors . Annex III presents a list of the audited RES 
projects.
OBSERVATIONS
Audited projects delivering outputs as planned …
The overall picture is one of well-planned projects delivering according to 
plan
14.	The audited RES projects were sufficiently mature and ready for 
implementation when selected. In spite of relatively long preparatory phases in 
some of the biomass and wind energy projects critical permits, licences and 
technical plans had usually been obtained prior to project approval. Where 
applicable, it was also ensured that the installations were connected to the 
transmission or distribution networks or that contracts were concluded with a 
sufficient number of consumers .
15.	There have been no significant cost overruns or time delays in the projects. 
Overall, the audited RES projects were implemented within the planned time 
schedules or with only relatively small time slippages (implementation was 
delayed by more than 6 months only in two projects of which one was due to 
repair downtime of a small combined heat and power plant). No significant cost 
overruns occurred during implementation. Box 2 shows examples of audited 
RES projects.
 
Picture 1 - Interior view of the biomass power plant in Bruck an der Mur, Austria 
(project installed and operational as planned)
Source: European Court of Auditors.
16.	With the exception of one biomass facility , the RES generation capacities 
were installed and operational as planned. No major risks to their technical 
sustainability were apparent. Few deviations from initial planning and approved 
project proposals were found. The projects’ installed energy generation 
capacities were generally in line with the co-financing decisions. The facilities 
have been in operation without major technical or other problems since their 
commissioning. Only a few generation units from the audited projects were not 
in operation mode. Operators had in place sufficient expertise and resources to 
ensure a smooth running and regular maintenance of their installations. 

 
Picture 2 - Wood chips in a storage hopper in the biomass power plant in Bruck an der 
Mur, Austria
Source: European Court of Auditors.
Box 2 – Examples of audited RES projects co-financed by the cohesion policy 
funds – outputs
For more details concerning project outputs see Annex III.
Biomass
Three audited biomass heating plants (capacity from 3 MW to 8 MW) with district 
heating network lines (of 0,6 to 11 km) were constructed in Austria. The plants 
supplied heat and hot water for a total 266 consumers (private individuals or industrial 
companies).
Three audited projects in Finland related to the construction of new biomass-pellet or 
wood chips boilers (capacity from 0,8 MW to 2,5 MW). They replaced old fossil fuel 
(heavy oil) boilers. Two of these projects included also construction of the required 
district heating network (0,6 and 3 km).
Wind power
Five wind farms with power capacities ranging from 3,2 to 38 MW were constructed in 
Poland. The facilities include all necessary infrastructures (high/medium voltage 
substations, connections to electricity grid and service roads).
Solar power (PV and solar collectors)
Two projects installed PV electricity systems with associated hardware and monitoring 
systems on public buildings in Malta. One project was complemented by a small wind 
turbine.
Five similar projects in Poland installed individual sets of flat plate solar collectors for 
households and public buildings in five municipalities to supply residents with hot 
water. In total, over 3 000 public and private beneficiaries installed solar collectors. 
One project included street lighting and PV.

… but encountering some difficulties in implementation
There is scope for further improvement at all project stages - from 
procurement through operations to monitoring and evaluation
17.	Difficulties with RES electricity integration into the grid have hampered 
exploitation of RES. Throughout the EU the development of the grid has been 
identified as one of the key barriers to the large-scale integration of RES 
electricity into the transmission and distribution grids . Accordingly, the Union 
and its Member States need to invest in both national networks and cross-
border links as part of building the internal energy market. The owners of the 
projects audited emphasised that spare capacity in the grids was insufficient , 
the grids have to be expanded and modernised and greater transparency about 
the distribution of costs among the grid operators, government and project 
promoters could improve system-wide efficiency. While only few of the audited 
projects encountered grid connection problems, the deployment of RES 
generation is, nonetheless, not accompanied by improved grids in the Member 
States. Technical and cost issues were frequently cited by national authorities 
and RES operators as impediments to an effective RES integration to the grids. 
Box 3 illustrates problems in connection with RES electricity in the grids.
 
Picture 3 - Windfarm in Golice, Poland
Source: European Court of Auditors.

Box 3 - Access to the grid of RES electricity in Poland, integration of electricity 
from photovoltaic  into the grid in Malta
The poor state and lack of spare capacity of the transmission and distribution grids 
have been key barriers to the further integration of electricity from PV and wind energy 
in Poland. Apart from the need for expansion and modernisation of grid infrastructure, 
complications with obtaining the necessary permits for grid connection (legal and 
technical problems as well as grid connection fees) hampered RES development . In 
the audited wind energy projects, the lead times to construction of the facilities, 
including for the required grid connection permits, have been 4 to 5 years.
Clear guidelines about planning permission and permits, where required, were 
available concerning solar and PV installations in Malta. However, in 2010 and 2011 
when multiple EU co-funded projects were commissioned these frequently 
encountered difficulties with feeding-in of their generated electricity - usually the 
electricity in excess of producers’ own consumption. Since meters had not been 
installed by the grid operator the producers were not compensated for their electricity 
by the feed-in tariff for periods of up to 4 months.
18.	The Commission in its analysis of Member States’ 2011 renewable energy 
progress reports indicated that progress removing the administrative barriers 
was still slow, with complex and discouraging authorisation and permitting 
procedures . There is potential for improvements in the Member States where 
the audit took place. The audit found, for example, that Malta had embarked on 
RES development only during the 2007-2013 period whereby a market for RES 
has not yet developed to maturity. An effective administrative system has not 
developed in full yet. Moreover, in Poland and in the United Kingdom national 
or regional harmonised approaches to coordinate the work of the authorities 
were partially lacking. Notably measuring and reporting of projects’ energy 
results were poor and hence data was not used for comparing projects and 
different RES sectors as a useful information in designing future measures.
19.	However, a good practice example was found in Austria. A quality 
management tool for biomass heating plants assured proper monitoring 
arrangements in this Member State (‘QM Heizwerke’, see Box 4).
Box 4 - Project monitoring in Austria
All biomass district heating plants larger than 400 kW and/or feeding a heating network 
larger than 1 km are obliged to carry out an accompanying quality management. 
Coordination of the funding process and the management of the necessary planning 
and operating data is facilitated through a database which provides a standard 
platform for project beneficiaries, as well as technical and economic data for quality 
managers and an IT platform for monitoring and optimisation of the operations. 
Introduced in 2006, ‘QM Heizwerke’ contains data from over 100 biomass plants.
Web link: www.qm-heizwerke.at

 
Picture 4 - Auditors visiting biomass power plant in Weissenbach an der Triesting, 
Austria
Source: European Court of Auditors.
20.	The procurement processes did not ensure full transparency, fairness or 
efficiency in contractors’ selection:
-	The tenders had to be cancelled in two audited PV projects in Malta 
because all bids had been technically or administratively non-compliant. 
This was due to either unnecessarily high technical requirements or overly 
complex procedures and requirements. In both cases some delay occurred 
and competition among bidders was hampered.
-	In two projects in Poland, the wind turbine models were specified 
unnecessarily in construction plans or construction permits. This prevented 
tender specifications which could ensure competitive procurement and best 
price/quality ratios. In another project, likewise, a specific solar collector 
type had been pre-determined. In each of those tenders only one bid of 
those submitted met the technical specifications.
-	Implementing bodies and project beneficiaries lacked sufficient expertise 
on RES technologies, their markets and procurement frameworks. Multiple 
RES equipment and installation works have been of a similar, sometimes 
identical, nature and small in size, especially the operations under grant 
schemes. Therefore, conditions were there for a coordinated procurement 
managed by a specialised unit of experts at national/regional level to obtain 
better price/quality ratios, economies of scale and also shorter 
procurement periods. Examples are roof top water heating systems, PV 
panels and small biomass in Malta and Poland. There were temporary 
suspensions of projects in Malta, partly, as a result of non-efficient 
organisation of procurement.  
 
Picture 5 - Biomass power plant in Flachau, Austria
Source: European Court of Auditors.
21.	The preparation of the RES projects has been insufficient for effective 
monitoring and evaluation. The objectives and performance indicators set in all 
operational programmes audited were imprecise and not based on reliable 
baseline data. Thus, the projects in the same or different RES sectors could not 
be compared; nor could the contribution of the EU funds to the EU and national 
RES targets be verified by the competent authorities (see also paragraph 30). 
… and results not properly measured or projects not attaining their 
energy generation targets in the majority of cases
RES data collection and reporting can be improved 
22.	No accurate, validated data about actual RES project results is available in 
the Member States. The RES sector was characterised by enormous volatility 
in terms of the costs of the technologies (most technologies saw massive price 
reductions) and increasing energy prices. It is important to analyse up-to-date 
information about RES technology costs in order to establish which 
technologies render the most favourable yields in the specific local 
circumstances and the appropriate levels of support. 
23.	However, while data is available about the projects’ installed generation 
capacities, no or non-reliable data was available on the actual generated 
energy in 11 out of 24 audited projects. Actual measurement and reporting not 
having been conditions for public co-financing, project final reports provided 
only estimated, non-measured results - usually based on technical parameters 
of the RES technologies as supplied by the manufacturers and the specific 
local situations. Multiple RES producers did not measure their energy yields. 
Thus, in 11 of 24 audited projects (five in Poland - solar projects in the Lublin 
region, four in Malta and two in the United Kingdom) the energy results were 
not based on measured / validated data but on assumed values taken from 
literature or professional estimates made by engineers.
Project results not always achieved
24.	Of 13 out of the 24 audited projects, in which energy generation results 
were actually measured, the targets were attained in only 5 projects, and 
almost attained in 3 further projects. The remaining projects did not reach or 
only partly reached their production targets. While in several cases this was 
due to insufficiently precise forecasts some projects had also encountered 
technical problems in their initial stages. Table 1 compares the RES projects’ 
planned with actual energy generation.
Table 1 - Comparison of average planned and actual energy generation in 
audited RES projects with measured energy generation results,  
2009-2012, in %
  
Source: Court’s own calculations based on ‘QM Heizwerke’ database (Austria), information about average 
investment costs of similar projects (Finland and Poland); project financing agreements, information about 
project results calculated by beneficiaries.
25.	In summary, the evaluation of the 24 audited projects’ cost-effectiveness, 
implementation and achievement of objectives has resulted in a mixed bag of 
good, satisfactory and poor projects, as is laid out in Annex IV. Box 5 indicates 
reasons for weak performance in some RES projects.
Box 5 – Reasons for weak project performance
In Austria, actual energy generation was in line with or above forecasts in those project 
stages which were directly supported by ERDF funds. However, in two projects which 
were later extended by additional heat capacity and networks serving additional 
customers the planned targets were not achieved. The main causes were 
overestimated heat demand or non-consumption of heat, temporarily, by major 
customers.
The reasons for a lower than anticipated performance in the Polish wind energy 
projects were too optimistic wind forecasts and technical problems during the first year 
of operation.
In the United Kingdom, moreover, although final data was not available and the 
audited grant schemes were not completed at the time of the audit, the results of sub-
projects revealed nonetheless that some of them did not attain their planned energy 
generation targets - mainly due to high water contents in the biomass materials or 
lower energy demand than estimated. 
The principle of cost effectiveness is not fully considered in planning the 
RES projects
Cost-effectiveness - an important objective in EU spending
26.	Cost-effectiveness concerns the ability or potential of an audited entity, 
activity, programme or operation to achieve certain outcomes at a reasonable 
cost. Cost-effectiveness analyses are studies of the relationship between 
project cost and outcomes, expressed as cost per unit of outcome achieved . 
27.	Optimal (or cost-effective) RES energy generation is important for economic 
performance. Cohesion policy funds constitute a significant part of support for 
RES activities and could be an important driver of both RES policy as well as 
regional economic development. 
  
Picture 6 - Windmill (outside and interior views of a wind turbine in Poland)
Source: European Court of Auditors.
There is scope for an emphasis on cost-effectiveness at an early stage 
28.	In connection with the preparation of the operational programmes, the 
national authorities did not conduct proper needs assessments to identify which 
technologies could contribute to attaining the RES targets in the most cost-
effective way and how they could be complemented by other financial 
instruments or national support schemes. As a result, the operational 
programmes did not contain explanations how the EU funds could contribute 
cost-effectively to attaining the RES objectives. 
29.	Moreover, the Commission and the national authorities did not plan the 
Cohesion policy (or national) funds’ contributions in attaining the RES targets. 
From the audited operational programmes, those in Austria and in Finland did 
not lay out the planned and actual RES energy generated from the ERDF and 
CF supported measures. The installed capacity from RES in the five audited 
countries to meet the RES target in 2020 is 95 304 MW (see Table 2). The 
implementation reports submitted by the managing authorities to the 
Commission reveal that, by 2012, 4 464 MW or 4,7 % of the required capacity 
as per the 2020 target (or 8,1 % in relation to the 2013 trajectory target in the 
audited Member States) was contributed through the Cohesion policy projects 
in these countries. The Cohesion policy funds’ use for RES has been variable 
among the Member States. As can also be seen from Table 2, for multiple 
Member States no adequate data is available for comparing the achievement of 
the Cohesion policy projects in relation to the RES targets. This lack of data 
inhibits establishing baseline economic and energy data in different RES 
sectors and for different RES technologies.
Table 2 - 2007-2013 Cohesion policy funds for RES and their impact on 
achievement of RES 2020 targets in the Member States

OP
ERDF and CF 
funds 
allocated to  
RES (EUR)1
Additional RES capacity 
as a result of ERDF and 
CF investments 
(MW)
Required additional RES 
capacity to meet the RES 
2020 target
(MW)
ERDF/CF contribution of total 
RES capacity to meet the 
RES 2020 target (in %)


Planned
Reported
(end 2012)
by 2013
by 2020

 (1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7=3:6)
Austria
25 037 408
105
99
11 301
13 179
0,79
Belgium
11 851 495
No data available
3 062
8 255
Data not reported to the 
Commission

Bulgaria
16 710 959
No data available
4 232
5 189

Cyprus
9 520 000
No data available
190
584

Czech 
Republic
397 759 730
131
12
No data available

Germany
252 995 745
29
118
71 621
110 934
0,03
Denmark

No data available
6 017
6 754
Data not reported to the 
Commission

Estonia

0
6
No data available

Spain
160 152 052
No data available
49 722
69 844

Finland
20 682 247
No data available
24 690
33 420
Data not reported to the 
Commission
France
363 591 135
1 161 307
1 833 445
39 628
62 167
Data not confirmed
Greece
283 795 789
156
106
6 872
13 271
1,18
Hungary
349 310 777
0
0
1 109
1 537
Data not reported to the 
Commission
Ireland

No data available
3 496
8 339

Italy
775 717 953
5 215
2 893
32 524
43 823
11,9
Lithuania
58 485 290
0
173
1 289
1 635
Data not reported to the 
Commission
Luxembourg
1 767 056
5 000
11 000
179
347
Data not confirmed
Latvia
67 180 000
77
21
1 661
2 168
3,55
Malta
78 200 000
No data available
36
160
Data not reported to the 
Commission
Netherlands
19 182 600
No data available
6 086
14 994
Data not reported to the 
Commission
Poland
825 761 396
972
246
4 444
10 335
9,4
Portugal
59 857 312
0
0
12 699
19 200
Data not reported to the 
Commission
Romania
331 542 611
200
275
9 635
12 589
1,58
Sweden
52 342 949
0
271
21 744
23 786
Data not reported to the 
Commission
Slovenia
54 186 553
355
120
1 258
1 693
21
Slovakia
90 252 216
98
72
2 144
2 746
3,57
United 
Kingdom
159 590 365
12 000
4 120
14 660
38 210
31,4
Croatia

No data available


Data not reported to the 
Commission
Audited MS
1 109 271 416
13 077
4 464
55 131
95 304
13,72
In total
4 665 401 221
1 185 643
1 852 975
318 998
505 159
Data not confirmed

1 Allocations/output (EUR/MW) among Member States is not comparable due to different 
nature of investments (energy generation, RES promotion, networks, pilot projects, etc.).
Source: National renewable energy action plans (2010), Implementation reports of the 
operational programmes for 2012.
30.	The cost-effectiveness of measures in different RES sectors was not 
examined and did not determine the budgets earmarked to RES under the 
audited operational programmes while proper needs assessment and mid-term 
evaluations were lacking:
-	When operational programmes were designed in 2007 there had been a 
lack of detailed situation analysis (including needs assessment in different 
RES sectors in the regions); in particular, the costs per unit of energy 
capacity installed or the costs of energy generation per unit had not been 
estimated by national authorities thus neglecting the cost-benefit / cost-
effectiveness of the measures planned to be financed through public 
means;
-	Also, the operational programmes did not take advantage of the results of 
or lessons learnt from previous RES programmes financed by national or 
EU resources;
-	No adequate justification for allocating public funds to RES generation 
interventions was provided. Fund allocations were, in general, based on 
rough estimation of the regional potential and fund absorption capacities 
rather than systematic analysis of the regional situation and comparison 
between potential alternatives in terms of types of RES or RES 
technologies;
-	Although the authorities in Finland and in the United Kingdom inserted 
some adaptations in their programmes along the way without formal 
assessments, in general however no mid-term evaluations or similar 
assessments of the 2007-2013 measures were conducted which could 
have helped redirect the RES programmes.
31.	Furthermore, the operational programmes failed to establish performance 
indicators for proper monitoring and evaluation of cost-effectiveness of RES 
measures which could also have facilitated assessing the contribution of the 
EU funds to the committed RES targets (Table 2). While the operational 
programmes in Austria, Poland and Malta had indicators referring to additional 
RES capacity, the set of result indicators in Finland did not include indicators 
for creation of generation capacity, produced energy or reduction/avoidance of 
CO2 emissions, and in the United Kingdom a result indicator in respect of RES 
capacity creation was also lacking. This means that, in these cases, the 
managing authorities and the Commission were not in a position to conduct 
adequate monitoring and ex-post evaluation of the Cohesion policy funds’ 
investments in RES .
 
Picture 7 - Transformer station in a wind park in Golice, Poland
Source: European Court of Auditors.

… and there is also scope for more cost-effective RES generation 
projects
32.	Removing inefficiencies in the planning and implementation of RES projects 
will make a direct contribution to achieving the 2020 EU and national RES 
targets. But it can also benefit the energy consumers and boost the broader 
economy as well. 
33.	The results of the EU-supported projects varied in terms of their cost-
effectiveness. The investment costs of RES technologies range widely and are 
site specific. There is no single most cost-effective RES generation technology 
in the EU. Therefore the audit compared only costs within a particular RES 
sector in the same Member State. Four audited projects were significantly more 
expensive than similar projects in the same Member State (biomass and PV 
projects, see Table 3). The calculated average costs for installed capacity 
varied from 0,16 million EUR/MW to 1,8 million EUR/ MW in the audited 
projects. As calculated by the national authorities in one of the Member States 
where the audit took place, the payback periods varied from 2 to 537 years in 
the audited projects. Capital-intensive investments with payback periods of 
more than 100 years will not achieve an economically reasonable break-even 
point. This indicates that public support was not always allocated to the most 
cost-effective projects. 

Table 3 - Cost-effectiveness of the audited RES projects
  
Source: Court’s own calculations based on project documentation, analyses by the managing 
authorities1.
1 Note to FI projects: Average machinery and equipment investment costs of the audited 
projects. Project 5 includes piping costs on the site, Project 6 auxiliary boiler only. Data not 
available for projects MT 23 and 24 (PV), PL 16 to 20 (solar energy) as well as UK 9 and 10 
(biomass).
34.	Rational energy objectives were only partly set for the RES projects. The 
projects were in line with national strategic RES objectives. Fuel supply 
concepts existed where necessary (biomass projects in Austria, Finland and in 
the United Kingdom). Some projects were preceded by limited studies showing 
their economic viability and profitability but no analyses were made concerning 
the best and most cost-effective RES types and best technological solutions. 
Evaluations of previous similar interventions were not referred and thus no 
‘lessons learnt’ were used in preparing the audited RES projects.
35.	Only about half of the audited projects (13 of 24) had data through which 
the achievement of the indicators in terms of actually achieved energy 
generation could be verified (Table 1 and Annex III), see also paragraph 24. 
Furthermore, frequently baseline data about the costs of energy production, the 
quantities of conventional fuels used by consumers was not available before 
objective-setting and designing the projects (e.g. operational programme of the 
Lublin region in Poland). Consequently, in such cases, it is not possible to 
assess whether the funded projects actually generated the expected economic 
or financial results (e.g. for calculating payback periods).
36.	The selection procedures did not guarantee cost-effective projects. In 
general, the project selection criteria, approved by the monitoring committees 
established for each operational programme, were not enabling the 
implementing authorities to identify the most cost-effective RES projects. The 
creation of energy capacity, actual energy generation and the relevant 
necessary investments were in many cases not weighted as selection or award 
criteria. In a few cases, no specific selection criteria in relation to RES 
generation had been developed but instead selection criteria universally 
applicable to multiple sectors covered by the operational programme were 
used . 
37.	There has been insufficient competition among project applications in some 
cases. Where the projects were identified through calls for proposals maximum 
cost-effectiveness of applications (payback period, investment to energy 
generation ratio) was not considered. Whereas usually project applications had 
to fulfil minimum criteria, the processes could not prevent subsidising relatively 
low quality projects in terms of their energy generation results. A determined 
minimum investment size risked that applications for smaller projects - possibly 
having better economic parameters - were discarded.
38.	On the other hand, Austria, the United Kingdom and to some extent Finland 
had technical and economic criteria in the financing rules geared towards 
preventing wasteful biomass projects to be selected. There was therefore less 
risk of selecting non-effective applications. Also, project profitability was taken 
into account whereby more profitable projects received less subsidies (Box 6). 
Such adaptation of the level of project co-financing was not ensured by the 
competent authorities in the other Member States where the audit took place. 
Box 6 – Project selection – cases in Austria, Finland and the United Kingdom
In Austria,  when applying for co-funding certain technical and economic criteria have 
to be met (heat density per running meter of the district heating pipe, district heating 
and boiler’s efficiency). As a result, there is much less risk that non-effective projects 
are supported.
In Finland, the eligibility criteria and possibility to have consultation with energy 
consultant/advisor intend to eliminate non-commercially viable projects: the project 
applicants were required to provide information about the payback-period of the 
applied project, which should not be less than 3 years (commercially profitable) nor 
longer than 12 years (uneconomic), without the public aid.
In the United Kingdom, the proposed project costs were compared with target costs 
based on past similar biomass projects.
39.	The EU co-financing rates varied between 2 % and 85 % in the operational 
programmes, without this being justified in the relevant documents. The co-
financing principle holds that part of the investment costs of a project is borne 
by the final recipient of a public grant whereby the revenue or profitability in the 
project are to be taken into account. The purpose of the grant should, 
furthermore, be to support an action which could not otherwise take off due to a 
financing gap or a lack of an economic incentive. There is an opportunity cost; 
high co-financing rates reduced the size or number of other RES projects which 
could have been supported through public funds. No links were made between 
rate of support and profitability or need for incentivising investors to carry out 
RES generation projects. Non-justified very high co-financing rates (public 
financial support to an amount higher than necessary for a project to be 
economically or financially viable) increased the risk of deadweight - i.e. 
replacing private funds, but also national funds - and reduced the number of 
supported RES generation projects. Box 7 illustrates cases of high co-
financing.
Box 7 – High public co-financing – cases in Poland and Malta
In Poland, the schemes for small PV and solar were allocated 85 % from EU funds, 
whereby individual project owners (households) could receive up to 100 % subsidy. 
Most large wind farms received maximum public support – either close to 70 % of total 
eligible investment costs or 10 million euro (4 of the 5 audited projects). While the 
maximum co-financing rates were applied in most cases they were, however, not 
modulated or justified based on cost-effectiveness considerations in any programming 
document. Four of five wind power project beneficiaries recognised that they could 
have implemented the projects without or with reduced grants and intended to use the 
EU grants for early repayment of loans.
Malta devoted a large part of available EU funding for supporting RES installations of 
public institutions thereby not sufficiently leveraging private funding sources. As a rule, 
the EU financed as much as 85 % of investment costs in those projects. Two large 
grant schemes, furthermore, for private households and enterprises financed RES 
installations by 50 % or 60 % respectively.
40.	Profitability calculations were not made for different RES sectors or 
technologies. When planning the programmes the co-financing rates did not 
distinguish between the RES sectors, size and types of investments, other 
promotion / support regimes in the Member States (feed-in tariffs, premiums), 
likely profitability of the investments and the type of RES technologies used.

 
Picture 8 - Solar collectors mounted on the roof of a family house in Poland
Source: European Court of Auditors.

Cohesion policy funds having limited EU added value - the RES projects 
did not make their full contribution to the EU’s energy objectives 
41.	In only a few cases was  significant EU added value demonstrated. In those 
projects the ERDF / CF co-financing facilitated the cap-funding, the co-
financing has been a welcome additional source of investment and thus 
contributed to the implementation of the projects. For the (larger) wind farms it 
was also regarded as a quality stamp for third-party financing institutions. It is 
clear that in countries with low RES penetration, which had few RES 
programmes and less administrative experience in this sector, the EU funds 
have had more value added in that they have helped to develop additional 
economic development, increase the quality of the relevant projects and also, 
to some extent, through acting as a catalyst and for leveraging other funds. 
Moreover, there has been an ‘operational value added’ to some extent as the 
EU projects imposed certain obligations on the implementing bodies through 
which some learning effects were assured for the organisations involved. 
Those effects were emphasised notably by organisations in Malta, Poland and 
the United Kingdom.
42.	The Court also found that the RES allocations within the operational 
programmes in Austria and Finland were prone to a risk of replacing national 
funds. Indeed, in both these countries the ERDF merely complemented existing 
national / regional funding mechanisms and in Austria the EU support was 
virtually integrated, without changing anything else, into an existing subsidy 
scheme for biomass plants. Austria and Finland have a long-lasting tradition of 
RES (especially in the hydro energy and biomass areas) and it is difficult to 
assess whether the EU funds contributed to additional value added, particularly 
in regard to innovation. 
43.	In 2012, the Commission stressed that Member States and regions need to 
ensure that funding for RES complements private investment, leveraging it, and 
not crowding it out . The Court found that some RES projects could have been 
implemented without public support. It was evident that multiple project 
applicants could have set up the RES installations without or with smaller public 
grants thus freeing up money for additional RES measures. However, the grant 
decisions were nonetheless important in view of bankable project financing: 
-	The Austrian projects in question were all endorsed after completion of the 
construction works signalling that the subsidy was not a condition for 
investment. 
-	Four of the five audited projects in Finland could have been realised 
without subsidies (only one project would not have been implemented 
without support by public funds).  
-	Several wind energy project owners said they would have carried out their 
projects without public subsidies as the economic incentive through the 
wind yields and the ‘green certificates’ had been sufficient. Indeed, multiple 
existing similar wind farms had been constructed without being subsidised. 
44.	The RES investments had only a limited effect on building managerial 
capacities. One of the intended effects of EU added value is improved 
administrative or managerial capacities in the Member States. Albeit various 
stakeholders in Malta, Poland and the United Kingdom claimed there had been 
invaluable learning effects from the EU projects, in general no far-reaching 
contributions to improving project planning, implementation and operation could 
be demonstrated. The RES grant schemes and individual projects were 
generally managed with a focus on regularity issues without addressing value 
for money requirements. In Austria and Finland, the EU co-financing was 
merely made part of the national support mechanisms without particular 
innovation aspects (see as well paragraph 42). The experience gained during 
the implementation of the projects was not disseminated in these two Member 
States or neighbouring regions.
45.	The RES projects were often operating in fragile regulatory environments. 
Although the EU funds devoted to RES generation were indeed not aimed at 
reforming regulatory frameworks, they could nevertheless have triggered 
improvements to those. The RES legal frameworks in many Member States 
have suffered multiple revisions, including retroactive changes in the subsidy 
and promotion regimes. Permitting procedures are often complex and 
discouraging or not applied consistently and, together with market uncertainty 
and volatility in energy prices, jeopardise investor confidence in the sector.
46.	There has been variable but overall low use of Cohesion funds for RES in 
the Member States. Although the EU funds allocated to RES increased from 
0,6 in the 2000-2006 programming period to 4,7 billion euro in the 2007-13 
programming period, this represents only 1,7 % of total ERDF and CF 
spending. In relation to the enormous investment needs in the sector for 
reaching the EU 2020 RES target the allocation of EU funds by the national 
and regional authorities was low . The Member States allocated between 0 % 
(the lowest value) and 10,7 % (the highest value) of total ERDF and CF funds. 
Even the 10 % allocated by Malta for RES is not significant to reaching its 
national RES target of 10 % by 2020 when considering that the country had 
practically no RES in 2007 and attained less than 2 % of RES in final energy 
consumption by 2012 (see Annex I). Of the Member States covered by the 
audit, Malta had failed to reach the first mid-term objective and Austria, Finland 
and Poland had not transposed the RES Directive in national legislation by the 
end of October 2013 (the deadline was 5 December 2010). 
47.	The uptake of the funds allocated to RES has been slow. By the end of 
2012 , the absorption of the available ERDF and CF funds for RES for 2007-
2013 (only 58 %) has been much lower than the average for the total ERDF 
and CF funds (88 %) and also lower than for energy efficiency measures 
(84 %). Although the market failures and barriers are of different nature in this 
sector the EU co-financed projects in almost all Member States have been 
managed by the same managing authorities, see Table 4. Relatively high 
complexity of the RES projects and a lack of administrative capacity to manage 
investment measures in this sector, clearly, had an impact on the lower ERDF 
and CF disbursement rates. Thus, overall, the Cohesion funds were of a 
modest significance for achieving the EU RES target.
Table 4 - Absorption of Cohesion policy funds for RES projects in the 
audited Member States (‘selected projects’ as at end of 2012)
EU Member State
Total Cohesion Policy 
funds selected 
projects (%)
Cohesion Policy 
funds selected 
Energy Efficiency 
projects (%)
Cohesion Policy funds 
selected RES projects 
(%)
Austria
75,6
287,3
50,6
Finland
90,8
34,5
30,6
Malta
88,1
37,9
43,3
Poland
85,4
112,2
57,8
United Kingdom
84,7
73,6
49,9
Average all Member 
States
87,7
84,5
58,0
       Source: DG Regional Policy database SFC 2007.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
48.	Overall, the Court concludes that value for money of Cohesion policy funds 
support to RES generation projects has been limited in helping achieve the EU 
RES 2020 target. 
49.	The audited projects delivered outputs as planned: Most of the audited RES 
projects were sufficiently mature and ready for implementation when selected, 
there have been no major cost overruns and time delays in the projects and the 
RES generation capacities, generally, were installed as planned (paragraphs 
14 to 16). 
50.	However, the Court found also that there were weaknesses in 
implementation: In particular concerning performance indicators, measuring 
and reporting of project results as well as procurement procedures and 
outcomes. In general, difficulties of integrating RES electricity into the grids 
have been identified as a major impediment to the development of RES in the 
EU (paragraphs 17 to 21).
51.	Moreover, the energy generation targets were not achieved or the results 
not properly measured in around two thirds of the audited RES projects. In 
most of these cases, insufficient or non-measured data about actual generated 
energy was available. The non-achievement of planned results was mostly due 
to imprecise forecasts or technical problems. Overall, the project outcomes 
have been mixed (paragraphs 22 to 25). 
52.	Furthermore, cost-effectiveness has not been the guiding principle in 
planning the projects. The underlying operational programmes were designed 
without prioritisation of the RES sectors and without assessments of the funds’ 
contributions to the RES objectives. Fund allocations were, in general, based 
on rough estimation of the regional potential and fund absorption capacities 
rather than systematic analysis of the regional situation and comparison 
between potential alternatives in terms of types of RES or RES technologies. 
The cost-effectiveness of the measures was neglected when they were 
allocated the budgets. Rational energy objectives and performance indicators 
for energy generation had not been set well in all projects. The selection criteria 
and procedures were frequently not conducive to selecting the most cost-
effective RES projects. Project results were mixed in regard of cost-
effectiveness whereby in some Member States the high co-financing rates were 
not justified in the documents in relation to the projects’ profitability (paragraphs 
26 to 40).
53.	The audit also found that the Cohesion policy funds for RES had a limited 
EU added value. There has been a risk of public funding replacement in those 
Member States which simply used the EU funds to complement their national 
grants for RES as well as a risk of deadweight. While the EU co-financing had 
some ‘operational value added’ the investment projects have not, however, 
helped build up managerial capacities in a significant way. Overall the use of 
ERDF and CF for RES has been modest in relation to the need for increased 
efforts to reach the EU objectives (paragraphs 41 to 47).
54.	The Court emphasises the need for improvements if Cohesion policy 
funding is to make the maximum possible contribution to achieving the energy 
targets . Furthermore, Cohesion policy spending, in general, brings benefits to 
the broader economy, including economic growth and job creation which are 
overarching aims of Cohesion policy. In view of a likely enhanced use of EU 
funds for promoting RES in the 2014–2020 programming period, the Court 
makes the following recommendations:

Recommendation 1
The Commission, through guidance setting for programme and project 
preparation and selection as well as through conditions for making funding 
available for RES generation investments, should:
*	ensure that future Cohesion policy co-funded RES programmes are guided 
by the principle of cost-effectiveness, including EU funding support to cost-
effective programmes that would not otherwise take place, so as to avoid 
deadweight. Programmes must be based on proper needs assessment, 
prioritisation of the most cost-effective technologies (while not 
discriminating between RES sectors) and optimal contribution to the EU 
2020 target. Adequate RES generation objectives in relation to the budget 
as well as projects selection criteria with a focus on the cost-effectiveness 
of the energy generation results (avoiding over-compensation of projects) 
need to be set;
*	promote the establishment by the Member States of a stable and 
predictable regulatory framework for RES in general, along with smoother 
procedures for the integration of electricity from RES into the grid networks.

Recommendation 2
The Member States should establish and apply, based on Commission 
guidance, minimum cost-effectiveness criteria which are adapted to the 
projects’ circumstances. They should also enhance the added value of 
Cohesion policy funds by improving RES project implementation as well as 
monitoring and evaluation and by building a stock of measured data about 
energy generation costs in all relevant RES sectors.

This Report was adopted by Chamber II, headed by Mr Henri GRETHEN, 
Member of the Court of Auditors, in Luxembourg at its meeting of 9 April 2014.

		For the Court of Auditors

		Vítor Manuel da SILVA CALDEIRA 
				President





Annex I
Overview of Member States’ progress towards the 2020 RES target

Member State
2010 
RES
share1 
1st interim 
target 2
2012
 RES 
share3
2020
RES target4
Belgium
5,0%
4,4%
6,8%
13%
Bulgaria
14,4%
10,7%
16,3%
16%
Czech Republic
9,3%
7,5%
11,2%
13%
Denmark
22,6%
19,6%
26,0%
30%
Germany
10,7%
8,2%
12,4%
18%
Estonia
24,7%
19,4%
25,2%
25%
Ireland
5,6%
5,7%
7,2%
16%
Greece
9,7%
9,1%
15,1%
18%
Spain
13,8%
10,9%
14,3%
20%
France
12,7%
12,8%
13,4%
23%
Italy
10,6%
7,6%
13,5%
17%
Cyprus
6,0%
4,9%
6,8%
13%
Latvia
32,5%
34,0%
35,8%
40%
Lithuania
19,8%
16,6%
21,7%
23%
Luxembourg
2,9%
2,9%
3,1%
11%
Hungary
8,6%
6,0%
9,6%
13%
Malta
0,4%
2,0%
1,4%
10%
Netherlands
3,7%
4,7%
4,5%
14%
Austria
30,8%
25,4%
32,1%
34%
Poland
9,3%
8,8%
11,0%
15%
Portugal
24,2%
22,6%
24,6%
31%
Romania
23,2%
19,0%
22,9%
24%
Slovenia
19,2%
17,8%
20,2%
25%
Slovakia
9,0%
8,2%
10,4%
14%
Finland
32,4%
30,4%
34,3%
38%
Sweden
47,2%
41,6%
51,0%
49%
United Kingdom
3,3%
4,0%
4,2%
15%
EU
12,5%
10,7%
14,1%
20%

Footnotes:
Achievement of 2020 RES target according to information provided by the Commission: 
1 Source: EUROSTAT, 10 March 2014. Actual share of energy from renewable sources (in % of 
gross final energy consumption) in 2012 (which also provides data for 2010). 
2 Source: Renewable energy progress report (Report from the Commission to the European 
Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of 
the Regions, (COM(2013) 175 final, 27.3.2013. First interim target, calculated as the average of 
2011/2012 shares.
3 Source: see footnote 1 above.
4 Source: Directive 2009/28/EC.



Annex II
Cohesion policy (ERDF and CF 2007-2013) funds allocation to RES and 
selected projects 2007-2012
 
1 Rate of selection above 100 % means funds were reallocated from other priorities or measures within 
the same or from another Operational Programme. 
Source: DG Regional Policy database SFC2007, 2012 Annual Implementation Reports for selected 
projects.


Annex III
List of audited RES generation projects
Project 
No
Member 
State
Operational 
programme
Intervention
Implementation 
mode
Project 
budget
(million 
euro)
Of which co-financing
Additional RES 
capacity installed 
(planned/actual) 
MW or kWp/a
Investments in 
audited 
projects
(million 
EUR/MW or 
EUR/kWp/a)
Average energy 
generated 
(planned/
actual)
MWh/a






National
(million euro)
ERDF / CF 
(million euro)



Project 
1
AT
Lower Austria
Construction of biomass plant in 
Weissenbach an der Tristing
Stand-alone 
project
0,745
0,117
0,117
3 / 3 MW
0,517
2 440/2 319 
MWh/a
Project 
2

Styria
Construction of biomass plant  
and a district heating network in 
Bruck an der Mur
Stand-alone 
project
5,658
0,871
0,882
8 / 8 MW
0,488
18 659 / 12 263 
MWh/a
Project 
3

Salzburg
Construction of biomass plant  
and a district heating network in 
Flachau
Stand-alone 
project
5,667
0,886
0,885
6 / 4 MW
1,027
24 009 / 23 026 
MWh/a
Project 
4
FI
Länsi-Suomen
Construction of biomass-pellet 
boiler replacing three fossil fuel 
boilers and main pipeline in 
Lievestuore  
Stand-alone 
project
0,405
0,017
0,011
1 / 1 MW
0,252
4 136 / 5 215 
MWh/a
Project 
5

Länsi-Suomen
Construction of biomass-wood 
chip boiler replacing fossil fuel 
boiler and modification of 
existing district heatingnetwork 
in Kyyjärvi industrial site 
Stand-alone 
project
0,711
0,085
0,056
1 / 1 MW
0,415
2 500 / 2 394 
MWh/a
Project 
6

Länsi-Suomen
Construction of a new biomass-
pellet boiler replacing fossil fuel 
boiler at Tikkakoski site 
Stand-alone 
project
0,388
0,022
0,009
2,5 / 2,5 MW
0,127
4 000 / 7 500 
MWh/a
Project 
7

Länsi-Suomen
Construction of a new biomass-
pellet boiler replacing fossil fuel 
boiler and necessary district 
heating network in a converted 
storage facility in Kiukainen. 
Stand-alone 
project
0,324
0,029
0,02
1 / 1 MW
0,270
2 800 / 4 000 
MWh/a
Project 
8

Länsi-Suomen
Construction of a new biomass-
pellet boiler replacing fossil fuel 
boiler in Eura 
Stand-alone 
project
0,447
0,054
0,036
0,8 / 0,8 MW
0,3
1 140 / 1 500 
MWh/a
Project 
9
UK
East Wales 
(Competitiven
ess) 
Wood Energy Business Scheme 
2 (80085)
Grant scheme
0,2
0
0,07
6 MW /Not 
provided
NA
2 700 MWh / Not 
yet available
Project 
10

West Wales 
and the
Valleys 
(Convergence
)
Wood Energy Business Scheme 
2 (80028)
Financing 
scheme
1,2
0
0,49
2,6 MW / Not 
provided
NA
5300 MWh/ Not 
yet available
Project 
11
PL
Infrastructure 
and 
Environment
Construction of wind farm East 
Margonin district II
Stand-alone 
project
29,209
11,81
5,906
20 / 20 MW
1,460
46 735 / 47 288 
MWh/a
Project 
12

Infrastructure 
and 
Environment
Construction of three wind 
turbines in Stypolow, Kozuchow 
municipality
Stand-alone 
project
7,584
1,85
4,315
4,5 / 4,5 MW
1,685
14 153 / 10 074 
MWh/a
Project
13

Infrastructure 
and 
Environment
Construction of wind farm 
Jarogniew-Mo³towo
Stand-alone 
project
30,179
15,35
10,0
20 / 20 MW
1,562
59 211 / 47 825 
MWh/a
Project 
14

Infrastructure 
and 
Environment
Construction of wind farm in 
Golice area
Stand-alone 
project
55,75
35,41
10,0
38 / 38 MW
1,467
80 332 / 57 393 
MWh/a
Project 
15

Infrastructure 
and 
Environment
Construction of four wind power 
stations in the Pluznica 
Commune
Stand-alone 
project
5,914
1,51
3,365
3,2 / 3,2 MW
1,848
8 286 / 7 381 
MWh/a
Project 
16

Lubelskie
Installation of solar collectors on 
public and residential buildings 
in K³oczew Commune
Stand-alone 
project
1,659
0,24
1,41
2,82 / 2,82 MW
0,528
1 502  MWh/a / 
Not provided
Project 
17

Lubelskie
Installation of solar collectors on 
public and residential buildings 
in Kraœnik Commune 
Stand-alone 
project
1,096
0,14
0,931
1,55 / 1,55 MW
0,588
972 MWh/a / Not 
provided
Project 
18

Lubelskie
Installation of solar collectors on 
public and residential buildings 
in Potok Górny Commune 
Stand-alone 
project
1,866
0,27
1,53
3,46 / 3,61 MW
0,415
1 974 MWh/a / 
Not provided
Project 
19

Lubelskie
Installation of solar collectors on 
public and residential buildings 
in Ruda-Huta Commune
Stand-alone 
project
1,188
0,17
1,010
1,89 / 1,89 MW
0,519
990 MWh/a / Not 
provided
Project 
20

Lubelskie
Installation of solar collectors, 
PV and street lighting in Goraj 
and Turobin Communes
Stand-alone 
project
1,371
0,2
1,165
0,12 / 0,12 MW
NA
Not defined / Not 
provided
Project 
21
MT
Investing in 
Competitivene
ss for a Better 
Quality of Life
Installation of Renewable 
Energy Sources at Malta 
College of Arts, Science and 
Technology
Stand-alone 
project
0,464
0,07
0,395
134/134 KW p/a
3 464
235 / 213 
MWh/a1
Project 
22

Investing in 
Competitivene
ss for a Better 
Quality of Life
Energy-Smart Authority 
(Housing Authority)
Stand-alone 
project
0,041
0,006
0,035
3,48/3,51 KW p/a
3 949
5,23 / 5,28 
MWh/a1
Project 
23

Investing in 
Competitivene
ss for a Better 
Quality of Life
Promotion of RES in the 
Domestic Sector
Grant scheme
16,932
2,76
14,392
9 216 KW p/a
NA
9 015 / 13 824 
MWh/a1
Project 
24

Investing in 
Competitivene
ss for a Better 
Quality of Life
ERDF Energy Grant Scheme for 
Enterprises
Grant scheme
18,404
2,76
15,643
6 023 KW p/a
NA
5 000 MWh/a / 
Not provided
1 Note: Actual results are not based on measured data.


Annex IV
Summary evaluation of RES project results
N.B. For reasons of comparability, in this annex some projects are divided in sub-projects so that the total is 27.
 
  



 
 
 
 

 	ISSAI 3000: Standards and guidelines for performance auditing based on 
INTOSAI's Auditing Standards and practical experience.
 	The audit results were derived from an examination of 24 completed renewable 
energy generation projects from nine Operational Programmes financed through 
the ERDF or the CF in Malta, Austria, Poland, Finland and the United Kingdom. 
The projects were in the biomass, photovoltaic, solar thermal and wind energy 
sectors.
 	COM(2010) 639 final of 10 November 2010 ‘Energy 2020: A strategy for 
competitive, sustainable and secure energy’.
 	COM(2006) 848 final of 10 January 2007 ‘Renewable Energy Roadmap - 
Renewable energies in the 21st century: building a more sustainable future’. 
 	Directive 2009/28/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April 
2009 on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources and 
amending and subsequently repealing Directives 2001/77/EC and 2003/30/EC 
(‘RES Directive’) (OJ L 140, 5.6.2009, p. 16).
 	Preamble (9) and (41) to the RES Directive.
 	Article 23(8)(c) of the RES Directive.
 	Article 18(1)(h) of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 1268/2012 of 29 
October 2012 on the rules of application of Regulation (EU, Euratom) 
No 966/2012 of the European Parliament and the Council on the financial rules 
applicable to the general budget of the Union (OJ L 362, 31.12.2012, p. 1).
 	European Parliament Resolution of 21 May 2013: Current challenges and 
opportunities for renewable energy in the European internal energy market 
(2012/2259(INI)).
 	COM(2013) 175 final of 27 March 2013 ‘Renewable energy progress report’.
 	COM(2013) 169 final of 27 March 2013 ‘Green Paper ‘A 2030 framework for 
climate and energy policies’. COM(2014) 15 final of 22 January 2014 'A policy 
framework for climate and energy in the period from 2020 to 2030'.
 	See, for instance, COM(2012) 271 final of 6 June 2012 ‘Renewable Energy: a 
major player in the European energy market’, and its 2010 and 2012 biannual 
progress reports, COM(2011) 31 final of 31 January 2011 and COM(2013) 175 
final of 27 March 2013. See also reports by European RES industry associations 
(European Renewable Energy Council (EREC) and its member organisations), 
particularly ‘Analysis of deviation and barriers, 2013 report’, by EREC, 
www.keepontrack.eu/publications.
 	Other EU programmes promoting RES in the 2007-2013 programming period 
were: European Energy Programme for Recovery, Intelligent Energy Europe 
Programme and Framework Programme for Research.
 	Regions will have to invest a minimum share of ERDF resources (20 % for more 
developed regions, 15 % for transition regions and 12 % for less developed 
regions) in supporting the shift towards a low-carbon economy in all sectors, 
including investments in renewable energy (Article 4(1) of Regulation (EU) 
No 1301/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 December 
2013 on the European Regional Development Fund and on specific provisions 
concerning the Investment for growth and jobs goal and repealing Regulation 
(EC) No 1080/2006 (OJ L 347, 20.12.2013, p. 289)).
 	A summary of the rules for the application of the European Regional Development 
Fund, the European Social Fund and the Cohesion Fund 2007-2013, including on 
management and control systems, is available on: 
http://europa.eu/legislation_summaries/regional_policy/management/g24241_en.
htm
 	Council Regulation (EC) No 1083/2006 of 11 July 2006 laying down general 
provisions on the European Regional Development Fund, the European Social 
Fund and the Cohesion Fund and repealing Regulation (EC) No 1260/1999 (OJ L 
210, 31.7.2006, p. 25).
 	Based on the allocation of funds to RES in the operational programmes the 
following were selected: 
OP I - Investing in Competitiveness for a Better Quality of Life - 
2007MT161PO001 
OP Niederösterreich 2007-2013: Ziel Regionale Wettbewerbsfähigkeit & 
Beschäftigung / EFRE - 2007AT162PO001 
OP Salzburg 2007-2013: Ziel Regionale Wettbewerbsfähigkeit & Beschäftigung / 
EFRE - 2007AT162PO006  
OP Steiermark 2007-2013: Ziel Regionale Wettbewerbsfähigkeit & Beschäftigung 
/ EFRE - 2007AT162PO007 
OP Program Operacyjny Infrastruktura i Œrodowisko - 2007PL161PO002  
OP Regionalny Program Operacyjny Województwa Lubelskiego - 
2007PL161PO007 
OP Alueellinen Kilpailukyky-ja työllisyystavoite; Länsi-Suomen EAKR-
Toimenpideohjelma 2007-2013 - CCI2007FI162PO003 
OP West Wales and the Valleys ERDF Convergence programme - 
2007UK161PO002 
OP East Wales ERDF Regional competitiveness and Employment programme - 
2007UK162PO012 

 	Of the 24 audited projects, 9 were for electricity production from full-scale or 
micro-wind turbines or photovoltaic panels, 15 projects related to heat generation 
from biomass or hot water production from solar collectors. The size of the 
projects varied from household-scale single solar panel projects to a wind farm 
with 16 turbines.
 	For instance, the approval of the audited biomass projects in Austria was 
conditional on a sufficient number of consumers of the produced heat energy.
 	One biomass power plant in Austria deviated from original plan in that it utilised 
EU funds for heat network extension instead of installing a second boiler as per 
original plan. This deviation was in anticipation of an extension of heating capacity 
to serve additional heat consumers and is therefore not a shortcoming from a 
sound financial management point of view.
 	COM(2013) 175 final.
 	See also Directive 2005/89/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 
18 January 2006 concerning measures to safeguard security of electricity supply 
and infrastructure investment (OJ L 33, 4.2.2006, p. 22). Article 3(2)(f) stipulates 
that Member States in implementing measures aimed at safeguarding security of 
electricity supply shall take account of the need to ensure sufficient transmission 
and generation reserve capacity for stable operation.
 	Integration of electricity from renewables to the electricity grid and to the electricity 
market – RES-Integration. National report: Poland. Eclareon, Oeko-Institut e.V., 
20.12.2011.
 	SWD(2013) 102 final of 27 March 2013 ‘Renewable energy progress report’.
 	ISSAI 3000: Standards and guidelines for performance auditing based on 
INTOSAI's Auditing Standards and practical experience.
 	The annual implementation reports by Finland and the United Kingdom did not 
provide explanations about actual results and their measurement and no 
assessment of the barriers, the potential and the needs in the different RES 
sectors in the regions covered by the audited OPs had been conducted.
 	For instance: 
?	the selection of RES projects under the operational programme ‘Infrastructure and 
Environment’ in Poland was based on the same criteria applied in different sectors, 
i.e. for non-comparable types of RES projects;
?	in Finland, the project applications were not prioritised and only estimated payback 
periods were used as cost-effectiveness and eligibility criteria; 
?	in Malta, the selection criteria applied to multiple sectors covered by the 
operational programme but not specifically to the RES sector. Though one criterion 
provided scores in relation to the projects’ ‘contribution towards indicators beyond 
minimum required’, the selection criteria did not include any cost-effectiveness or 
cost-benefit criteria for RES generation;
?	in Austria, a maximum cost-effectiveness of applications (payback period, 
investment to energy generation ratio) was not considered in the audited 
operational programmes.
 	COM(2012) 663 final of 15 November 2012 ‘Making the internal energy market 
work’.
 	SEC(2011) 131 final of 31 January 2011. 
 	The amounts allocated by the managing authorities to selected projects. The last 
available data is from the end of 2012.
 	Within this policy area, the Court published a report on the energy efficiency 
measures co-financed by the ERDF and the CF (Special Report No 21/2012 
‘Cost-effectiveness of Cohesion Policy Investments in Energy Efficiency’ 
(https://eca.europa.eu)). The audit analysed the cost-effectiveness of cohesion 
policy investments in energy efficiency, with a specific focus on the Commission’s 
management role in relation to its approval of operational programmes and the 
monitoring of programme execution in the regions.