Special Report No 4/2011
(pursuant to Article 287(4), second subparagraph, TFEU)

The audit of the SME Guarantee facility


together with the Commission’s replies



	TABLE OF CONTENTS
	
	Paragraph
Glossary	
Executive summary	I - VII
Introduction	1 - 11
SMEs and access to finance	1 - 6
The main features of the SMEG facility	7 - 11
Audit scope and approach	12 - 14
Audit findings	15 - 98
Design of the SMEG facility	15 - 27
The SMEG facility is based on a valid implicit intervention  
logic	16 - 19
The impact assessment helped to design the facility; however,  
it contained little factual evidence in support of the facility	20 - 22
Compared to MAP, the objectives are more precise, but  
lack clarity and specific targets	23 - 27
Setting up the management structure of the SMEG facility:  
delegating the day-to-day management to the EIF	28 - 45
Delays in planning the SMEG facility	31 - 33
To preserve the continuity of the support a “retroactivity  
clause” was introduced	34 - 37
Appropriate management framework established to  
operate the SMEG facility	38 - 45
Selection of financial intermediaries	46 - 55
Well designed selection framework	47 - 50
Insufficient records justifying the agreement parameters	51 - 53
Policy objectives not fully defined in the guarantee  
agreements	54 - 55
Performance monitoring and reporting	56 - 72
Performance indicators were established, but should  
be more stable and balanced	59 - 68
Reporting requirements are clear and reasonable and only  
some financial intermediaries consider them as a burden	69 - 72
Achievements of the SMEG facility	73 - 98
Outputs of the SMEG facility	74 - 87
European added value	88 - 98
Conclusions and recommendations	99 - 104

Annex I - Overview of the CIP structure down to the SME Guarantee 
Facility
Annex II - Monitoring by the Commission and the EIF
Annex III - Reporting by the Financial intermediaries to the EIF

Reply of the Commission







GLOSSARY

Additionality
The EU SME guarantee facility is intended to provide 
additional access to finance for SMEs and not to 
substitute for state spending. Additionality will 
typically occur if lending volumes increase when 
compared to a scenario without EU intervention.
CIP
The Competitiveness and Innovation Framework 
Programme was established by Council Decision No 
1639/2006 of the European Parliament and of the 
Council covering the period 2007-2013. It is a 
programme launched by DG ENTR and DG ECFIN, 
managed by the EIF under the supervision of DG 
ECFIN to foster entrepreneurship and innovation of 
EU SMEs. 
CIP Decision
Decision No 1639/2006/EC of the European 
Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 2006 
establishing a Competitiveness and Innovation 
Framework Programme (2007 to 2013)
DG ECFIN
Directorate General for Economic and Financial 
Affairs at the Commission
DG ENTR
Directorate General for Enterprise and Industry at the 
Commission
EIB
European Investment Bank
EIF
The European Investment Fund has been set up by 
the EIB to structure and grant specialised financial 
products, including venture capital, guarantee 
instruments for SMEs and securitisation. The EIF 
works with a network of financial intermediaries, many 
of which are specialised in SME finance. In the 
context of the CIP, the EIF can be seen as the 
operational manager of the SME Guarantee facility.
EIP
The Entrepreneurship and Innovation Programme is 
one of 3 pillars of the CIP framework to promote 
entrepreneurship and innovation.
Ex-ante impact 
assessment
Commission Staff Working Document, Annex to the 
Proposal for a Decision of the European Parliament 
and of the Council establishing a Competitiveness 
and Innovation Framework Programme (2007-2013), 
SEC(2005) 433.
Financial instruments
In the text this refers to the SMEG facility. Other 
Community financial instruments for SMEs under the 
EIP Programme include the High Growth and 
Innovative SME Facility (GIF) and the Capacity 
Building Scheme (CBS).
Financial intermediary
The financial intermediaries participating in the SMEG 
facility can be public guarantee institutions, mutual 
guarantee organisations, micro-finance institutions or 
commercial banks. They may be direct lenders that 
provide loans to SMEs, or indirect guarantee 
organisations that either co-guarantee or counter-
guarantee a loan portfolio, of one or several direct 
lenders.
FMA
Fiduciary and Management Agreement of 20.9.2007 
between the European Community and the EIF for 
the SMEG facility under the Competitiveness and 
Innovation Framework Programme (2007-2013).
G&E
The Growth and Employment initiative established by 
Council Decision 347/1998 covering the period 1998-
2000. The successor programme of G&E is the MAP.
Guarantee cap amount
The guarantee cap amount refers to the maximum 
amount of losses for which the EIF is liable under an 
EU guarantee.
Guarantee cap rate
The guarantee cap rate is a pre-agreed rate at which 
the EIF’s liability is capped under a guarantee 
agreement. The amount of the EIF’s liability under a 
guarantee agreement (guarantee cap amount) can be 
calculated by multiplying the actual portfolio volume 
by the guarantee rate and the guarantee cap rate. 
E.g. portfolio volume = 1000; guarantee rate = 50 %; 
guarantee cap rate = 10 %. Thus, maximum EIF 
liability (guarantee cap amount) = 1000 x 50 % x 
10 % = 50.
Guarantee deal
Guarantee deals are the individual guarantee 
agreements between the EIF and a financial 
intermediary covering the activities performed on the 
basis of these agreements.
Impact
Longer-term socio-economic consequences that can 
be observed after the completion of an intervention, 
which may affect either direct or indirect addressees 
of the intervention. 
Implementation report
The CIP Council Decision stipulates that the 
Commission should draw up an annual 
implementation report for the Framework Programme 
and for each specific programme, examining the 
supported activities in terms of financial 
implementation, results and, where possible, impact. 
The Commission should communicate the annual 
implementation reports to the European Parliament, 
the Council, the European Economic and Social 
Committee and the Committee of the Regions.
Input


Financial, human and material resources that are 
mobilised for the implementation of an intervention. 
Lisbon Strategy
During the meeting of the European Council in Lisbon 
(March 2000), the Heads of State or Government 
launched a "Lisbon Strategy" aimed at making the 
European Union the most competitive economy in the 
world and achieving full employment by 2010.
MAP
The Multi-Annual Programme for Enterprise and 
Entrepreneurship covering the period 2001-2006 is an 
SME programme of DG ENTR managed by the EIF 
under the supervision of DG ECFIN. It was the 
predecessor programme of the CIP.
Maximum portfolio 
amount 
The maximum portfolio amount is the maximum loan 
volume which may be covered by the EU guarantee. 
It is established by the EIF for each financial 
intermediary, taking into account various 
considerations such as the available EU budget and 
comparable past lending volumes. 
OECD
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development
Outcome
Change that arises from the implementation of an 
intervention and which normally relates to the 
objectives of this intervention. Outcomes include 
results and impacts. Outcomes may be expected or 
unexpected, positive or negative. 
Output
What is produced or accomplished with the resources 
allocated to an intervention. 
Reference volume
Reference volume represents the amount of 
guarantees or financing which the intermediary could 
reasonably be expected to achieve in the absence of 
the EU guarantee.
Result
Immediate changes that arise for direct addressees at 
the end of their participation in an intervention. 
SME
Small and Medium-sized Enterprise. As per 
Commission Recommendation of 6 May 2003 
concerning the definition of micro, small and medium-
sized enterprises, SMEs are defined as enterprises 
which employ fewer than 250 employees, which have 
an annual turnover not exceeding 50 million euro, 
and/or an annual balance sheet total not exceeding 
43 million euro and conform to the criterion of being 
an autonomous enterprise.
SMEG facility




SME Guarantee facility: a financial instrument 
managed by the EIF, providing guarantees or counter 
guarantees to financial intermediaries for loans 
granted by financial institutions to SMEs aiming at 
increasing the SMEs’ debt financing supply.
SMEG windows
The four windows of the SMEG facility are:
*	debt financing via loans or leasing,
*	microcredit financing,
*	guarantees for equity or quasi-equity 
investments in SMEs, and
*	securitisation of SME debt finance portfolios.


EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
I. The SME Guarantee (SMEG) facility is a financial instrument managed by 
the 
European Investment Fund on behalf of the European Commission and 
providing 
guarantees or counter guarantees to financial intermediaries for loans 
granted by 
financial institutions to SMEs aimed at increasing the supply of debt 
financing.

II. The objective of the Court’s audit was to assess the effectiveness of 
the SMEG 
facility, notably the design and planning, the management of its 
operations and 
the achievement of its objectives. 

III. The Court found that the objectives of the current SMEG facility are 
more 
precise than under the predecessor programmes, but they are only 
specific, 
measurable, achievable and timed in relation to the expected outputs. The 
intervention logic was not made explicit and limited quantification of 
potential 
impacts was provided at the planning stage of the facility. 

IV. The framework for the management of daily operations is considered 
appropriate, but does not include scoring standards or minimum 
requirements for 
the selection of financial intermediaries. 

V. Sufficient output indicators were established, which were used to 
report on 
SMEG’s implementation. Reporting requirements are satisfactory and 
accepted 
by the financial intermediaries. 

VI. The only quantified target relating to the number of SMEs to be 
reached with 
the SMEG facility is attainable. Concerning the purpose of the loans 
granted, less 
than half were given to SMEs that lacked collateral and only 12 % were 
given to 
SMEs that used them for innovative investments. The analysis of the 
Court’s 
sample of loans identified a deadweight of 38 %. The EU added value of 
the 
facility was not clearly demonstrated before it was launched neither is 
it indicated 
in the guarantee agreements with the financial intermediaries. 

VII. The Court recommends that the programme logic should be made 
explicit in 
any similar future intervention, and additional or better performance 
indicators 
considered. The selection of potential financial intermediaries should be 
based on 
minimum requirements for the criteria that have to be fulfilled by the 
applicants 
and a scoring system should be put in place to make the applications 
comparable. 
Appropriate measures to minimise deadweight should be envisaged. During 
the 
planning period, the EU added value of the instrument should be clearly 
demonstrated. 


INTRODUCTION
SMEs and access to finance
1.	Small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs) are the backbone of the EU 
economy , representing 99 % of all enterprises and providing 75 million 
jobs in the 
European Union .  However, the financial markets are wary of investing in 
new or 
young SMEs which are perceived as high-risk investments, especially if 
they are 
in innovative markets. According to the Observatory of European SMEs , 
limited 
access to finance is a problem for SMEs in Europe. The public sector has 
an 
important role to play in supporting the SME sector, in particular the 
provision of 
suitable financing. 
2.	SME policy is a key element of the Lisbon Strategy aiming to make 
Europe a 
more attractive place to invest and work . The Lisbon Strategy stressed 
that 
entrepreneurial initiatives and innovation must be stimulated and 
encouraged. 
Therefore a friendly environment should be created for starting up 
innovative 
businesses, especially SMEs . One of the EU support measures to SMEs 
facilitates their access to external finance and is known as the SME 
Guarantee 
(SMEG) facility. 
3.	The SMEG facility was established in October 2006 as part of the 
Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme (CIP)  . It originates 
in 
Council Decision 98/347/EC on measures of financial assistance for 
innovative 
and job-creating SMEs – Growth and Employment (G&E), which was continued 
as part of the subsequent Multi-Annual Programme for Enterprise and 
Entrepreneurship (MAP)  established in 2001. Under the CIP, the SMEG 
facility is 
one of the Community’s financial instruments which were launched under 
the 
Entrepreneurship and Innovation Programme (EIP) (see Annex I). 
4.	The EIP has wide ranging objectives: “to improve access to finance 
for the 
start-up and growth of SMEs and investment in innovation activities”. The 
SMEG 
facility encompasses different types of guarantee schemes, each aiming to 
support entrepreneurship through the enhancement of SME access to 
finance. It 
comprises four different schemes (or ‘windows’), the loans and leases 
window, 
the micro credit window, the equity and quasi-equity window and the 
securitisation 
window.
5.	The SMEG facility was allocated 978 million euro for the period 1998 
to 2013 
under the three successive framework programmes (G&E, MAP and CIP). At 
the 
end of 2009 this budget guaranteed a total loan portfolio of 10,6 billion 
euro (see 
Table 1).
Table 1 - SMEG facility overall budget

Budget
Guaranteed loan portfolio as at 
the end of 2009

(million euro)
(million euro)
SMEG 1998 (G&E)
187
2 402
SMEG 2001 (MAP)
281
4 642
SMEG 2007 (CIP)
5101
3 534
TOTAL
978
10 578
1 Indicative budget for SMEG at the start of the CIP. The allocation of 
budgets between the 
different types of financial instruments is done on an annual basis.
Source: ECA based on various reports from the European Commission and the 
European 
Investment Fund.
6.	510 million euro are earmarked under the current CIP for the period 
2007 to 
2013. The budget is only drawn upon when guaranteed loans default, and 
for 
each intermediary a maximum EU budget liability is fixed. Until 31 
December 
2009 the total amount of guarantee calls made under the CIP was 1,7 
million 
euro. For a detailed breakdown of the results achieved by the facility 
under the 
CIP, see Table 2.
Table 2 - Results achieved by the SMEG facility under the CIP - key 
figures as at 31 
December 2009

 
Total
Loan window
Microcredit 
window
Number of intermediaries
21
17
4
Number of agreements
25
21
4
Countries covered
13
11
4
Number of SMEs
58 767
50 476
8 314
Number of loans
64 327
55 796
8 531
Number of employees (estimated at 
inclusion date)
217 134
204 155
13 004
EU guarantee in million euro 
3 534
3 306
228
Net called guarantees in million euro
1,7
0,8
0,9
Loan amount in million euro
3 793
3 695
98
Investment amount in million euro
6 849
6 692
157
Estimated SME financing guaranteed 
in million euro
11 610
11 264
346
Source: “Quarterly Report 31 December 2009 – SMEG 2007 facility”, the 
European Investment 
Fund.
The main features of the SMEG facility
7.	The operational management of the SMEG facility involves several 
parties 
(see Figure 1).
Figure 1 - Overview of the SMEG process flow
 
Source: European Court of Auditors.
8.	Two Directorates General at the European Commission, plus the 
European 
Investment Fund (EIF) , are all involved in the design, management and 
monitoring of the SMEG facility. The Directorate General for Enterprise 
and 
Industry (DG ENTR) is the coordinator of the legal basis, prepares the 
annual 
work programmes and implementation reports of the various CIP pillars and 
is 
responsible for organising the programme evaluations. The Directorate 
General 
for Economic and Financial Affairs (DG ECFIN) has the direct management 
responsibilities for SMEG, being in charge of negotiating the Fiduciary 
and 
Management Agreement (FMA) with the EIF , approving financial 
intermediaries, 
monitoring cash movements on the trust accounts and ensuring that funds 
are 
spent in line with the CIP’s objectives.  
9.	The EIF provides guarantees to financial intermediaries aiming to 
improve 
their lending capacity and, therefore, the availability and terms of 
loans towards 
SMEs. The EIF signs guarantee agreements in its own name, on behalf of 
the 
Commission and at the risk and cost of the Union budget. In order to 
allow the 
Commission to monitor the facility, the EIF reports to DG ECFIN on the 
progress 
achieved on a quarterly basis.
10.	The financial intermediaries participating in the SMEG facility are 
public 
guarantee institutions, mutual guarantee organisations, micro-finance 
institutions 
and commercial or publicly owned or controlled banks. They can be direct 
lenders 
that provide loans to SMEs or indirect guarantee organisations that 
either co-
guarantee or counter-guarantee  a SME loan portfolio of one or several 
direct 
lenders. Each guarantee deal  determines specific target volumes for the 
loans to 
be achieved by the financial intermediary. 
11.	SMEs have to meet the Commission’s SME definition to be eligible for 
a 
guarantee under the SMEG facility. An SME is defined as an enterprise 
which 
employs fewer than 250 employees and which has an annual turnover not 
exceeding 50 million euro and/or an annual balance sheet total not 
exceeding 
43 million euro. It must also satisfy the criterion of being an 
autonomous 
enterprise .
AUDIT SCOPE AND APPROACH
12.	The objective of the Court’s audit was to assess the effectiveness of 
the 
SMEG facility by addressing the following audit questions:
-	Has the Commission designed the SMEG facility and its management 
structure in a coherent and effective manner?
-	Have the Commission and the EIF established and applied effective 
procedures to select appropriate financial intermediaries and to monitor 
the 
performance of the SMEG facility?
-	Have the SME guarantee deals contributed to the achievement of the 
policy’s objectives? 
13.	The audit examined the roles and responsibilities of all main parties 
involved in 
the SMEG facility – the Commission, the EIF and the financial 
intermediaries. The 
main focus was the SMEG facility under the CIP (2007-2013); the SMEG 
under 
the MAP was used for the purpose of comparisons with the CIP. 
14.	The audit covered the following:
-	an assessment of whether the SMEG objectives were SMART and whether 
the design and planning of the facility was likely to achieve effective 
results;
-	an evaluation of the management of the SMEG facility’s operations, 
comprising an assessment of the financial intermediary selection 
procedures and the Commission and EIF reporting and monitoring 
procedures;
-	visits to nine financial intermediaries  (out of the 14 that were 
contracted at 
the audit planning stage in June 2009). They were selected according to 
the following criteria: (i) type of guarantee, (ii) actual guarantee 
volume 
achieved, (iii) type of financial intermediary, and iv) direct guarantee 
or 
counter-guarantee. For each financial intermediary the related guarantee 
proposal, its assessment by the EIF and the Commission and the 
agreement signed between the EIF and the financial intermediary were 
examined;
-	selection of a sample of 181 loans from the nine financial 
intermediaries 
visited in order to assess that the use of the guaranteed SME loans was 
in 
line with the SMEG objectives ; and
-	a questionnaire to all 51 financial intermediaries participating 
under MAP 
and/or CIP  in order to obtain their views on the design and management 
of the SMEG facility . 
AUDIT FINDINGS
Design of the SMEG facility
15.	Public intervention is more likely to be successful if it is properly 
designed. In 
order to assess the design, this section analyses the intervention logic 
underlying 
the SMEG facility. It scrutinises the ex-ante impact assessment for the 
CIP  
related to the SMEG facility and the extent to which the results of this 
assessment 
were taken into account during the design stage. Finally, the objectives 
of the 
SMEG facility are assessed in the light of specific, measurable, 
achievable, 
relevant and timed (SMART) criteria.
The SMEG facility is based on a valid implicit intervention logic
16.	The intervention logic provides the link between an intervention's 
inputs and 
the production of its outputs and, subsequently, to its impacts on 
society in terms 
of results and outcomes. It describes how an intervention is expected to 
attain its 
global objectives. An explicit intervention logic shows how the programme 
is 
supposed to function.
17.	Neither the CIP Decision nor the Commission’s proposal or the impact 
assessment for CIP explicitly described the intervention logic of the 
SMEG facility 
in this manner. The absence of an explicit intervention logic was also 
noted by the 
EIP interim evaluator . 
18.	The different preparatory documents, however, do provide sufficient 
information to make an implicit assumption on how the SMEG facility is 
supposed 
to function. For lenders it can be difficult to assess individual loan 
applications and 
the risks involved, especially if a borrower does not have an established 
track 
record (start-ups). In such a situation the borrowers can guarantee the 
loan to the 
lender through the provision of collateral, but those who do not have 
sufficient 
collateral may be denied access to credit even with viable business 
propositions. 
The SMEG facility seeks to remedy this situation by providing guarantees 
in cases 
where the SMEs are unable to do so. 
19.	Nevertheless, in the absence of an explicit intervention logic, it is 
difficult to 
understand the rationale of some specific elements of the SMEG facility, 
such as 
targeting innovative SMEs by the loan window. Innovative SMEs are 
targeted 
through debt financing although equity investments are generally 
considered more 
appropriate for this type of SME .
The impact assessment helped to design the facility; however, it 
contained 
little factual evidence in support of the facility
20.	The impact assessment is an important instrument used by the 
Commission 
when designing a policy . The impact assessment should identify and 
analyse 
the problem at stake,  the objectives to be pursued and the main policy 
options 
that are available to achieve those objectives. For the various policy 
options, the 
assessment should evaluate their likely economic, social and 
environmental 
impacts. Finally, the impact assessment should identify the monitoring 
and 
evaluation arrangements needed during policy implementation.
21.	As regards the SMEG facility, this type of analysis forms part of the 
CIP impact 
assessment. The CIP impact assessment contained all the mandatory 
sections 
and as such it gives insight into the considerations that shaped the 
design of the 
CIP and its main elements such as the SMEG facility. Thus, the CIP impact 
assessment represents an improvement compared to the MAP, for which no 
such 
analysis was made. 
22.	However, many parts of the CIP impact assessment are not sufficiently 
detailed and quantified. For example, the analysis of the problem lacks 
any 
indication of its magnitude and the analysis of different policy options 
is based 
only on a simplistic qualitative comparison without any quantification of 
the likely 
impacts. For the retained option, except for the impact on the number of 
jobs, the 
Commission quantified expected outputs  instead of the impact. 
Compared to MAP, the objectives are more precise, but still lack clarity 
and 
specific targets 
23.	SMART objectives shall be set for any budget activity . The 
objectives are 
considered:
-	specific if they are precise and concrete enough not to be open to 
varying 
interpretations ; 
-	measurable if the output can be measured and therefore any 
improvements 
assessed; 
-	achievable if the expected results can realistically be produced with 
the 
available resources;
-	relevant if they relate to the needs and to the strategic objectives; 
and
-	timed if they relate to a deadline or time period24.
24.	Due to the rather complex structure of the CIP (see Annex I), the 
hierarchical 
structure of the objectives is also complex. Four global objectives are 
set at the 
level of the framework programme . In the case of the EIP which includes 
the 
SMEG facility, the immediate objectives  are defined at the level of the 
specific 
programme . Although no specific objectives are set at the level of the 
financial 
instruments, article 19.2 of the CIP Decision describes each window of 
the SMEG 
facility in an objective-like fashion (see Box 1).
Box 1-  Objectives relevant to the SMEG facility
Global objective
To foster the competitiveness of enterprises, in particular of SMEs.
Immediate objective 
To improve (…) access to finance for the start-up and growth of SMEs and 
investment in innovation activities.
The four SMEG windows 
Loan window - shall reduce the particular difficulties SMEs face in 
accessing 
finance either due to the perceived higher risk associated with 
investments in 
certain knowledge-related activities such as technological development, 
innovation and technology transfer, or due to a lack of sufficient 
collateral.
Microcredit window - shall encourage financial institutions to play a 
greater role in 
the provision of loans of a smaller amount which would normally involve 
proportionately higher unit handling costs for borrowers with 
insufficient collateral. 
In addition to guarantees or counter-guarantees, financial intermediaries 
may 
receive grants to partially offset the high administrative costs inherent 
in micro 
credit financing.
Equity and quasi equity window - shall include investments which provide 
seed 
capital and/or capital in the start-up phase, as well as mezzanine 
financing, in 
order to reduce the particular difficulties which SMEs face because of 
their weak 
financial structure, and those arising from business transfers.
Securitisation window - shall mobilise additional debt financing for SMEs 
under 
appropriate risk-sharing arrangements with the targeted institutions. 
Support for 
those transactions shall be made available upon an undertaking by the 
originating 
institutions to grant a significant part of the liquidity resulting from 
the mobilised 
capital for new SME lending in a reasonable period of time.
25.	The objectives are relevant, but they are only specific, stated in a 
measurable 
format and timed as regards the expected outputs of the facility. The 
quantified 
target of reaching 315 750 SMEs seems to be reasonably achievable (see 
paragraph 77). 
26.	Compared to the MAP, the objectives of the SMEG facility were more 
precise. 
However, they are defined in a very broad manner. For instance, according 
to the 
EIP immediate objective, the loans have “to improve access to finance for 
the 
start-up and growth of SMEs”. Such an objective implies a very broad set 
of 
potential target SMEs as it can be argued that almost any borrowing by 
any SME 
will be undertaken in order to ensure the growth of a company. Also, the 
concept 
of innovation has been interpreted in a wide way .
27.	The CIP impact assessment sets an output target for the number of 
SMEs 
expected to benefit within the seven year programme horizon. Targets in 
terms of 
results or impact have not been set (for more details, see paragraph 64). 
An 
estimated number of direct jobs maintained or created within five years 
was 
provided in the impact assessment. This does not directly relate to any 
of the 
objectives, but can be derived from the renewed Lisbon strategy.
Setting up the management structure of the SMEG facility: delegating the 
day-to-day management to the EIF 
28.	The cornerstone of efficient and effective delegation is the 
contractual 
agreement detailing the provisions for the implementation of the tasks 
entrusted to 
the specialised body. This contractual agreement should in particular 
detail the 
obligations of the specialised body and include all appropriate 
arrangements for 
ensuring that the policy objectives will be attained . 
29.	The EIF has systematically developed expertise in providing financial 
engineering products to SMEs in Europe. It was selected by the European 
Community to operate the day-to-day management of the SMEG facility at 
its start 
in 1998. Using the EIF under the successive multi-annual programmes (G&E, 
MAP and then CIP) aims to ensure the required continuity of the 
management of 
the SMEG facility. 
30.	In this context, the Court examined: 
-	whether the implementation of the SMEG facility was being effectively 
planned to avoid delays and to provide an uninterrupted support to the 
SMEs; 
and
-	whether the regulatory framework  defining the services to be 
provided by 
the EIF ensures efficient and effective management of the facility.
Delays in planning the SMEG facility
31.	Considering that the MAP covered the period from 2001 to 2006 and the 
CIP 
covers the period from 2007 to 2013, the start of the operations under 
the CIP 
should have been planned in order to preserve the continuity of the 
financial 
support. The FMA should have been in place at least 11 months (see 
paragraph 
33) before the start of the CIP as this would have left sufficient time 
for signing the 
guarantee agreements between the EIF and the financial intermediaries.
32.	The first draft version of the FMA under the CIP was dated March 
2006, but 
was not signed until 20 September 2007, nearly nine months after the 
start of the 
CIP. Thereafter, it took almost one year until the first guarantee 
agreement 
between the EIF and a financial intermediary was signed  (see Figure 2).
Figure 2 - Timeline of the MAP and CIP legal base
 
33.	The average period from the receipt of the CIP application from an 
intermediary up to the signature of the agreement was nearly eleven 
months . 
Moreover, the timeframe for the application process was considered to be 
unreasonable by eight out of 21 respondents to the Court’s questionnaire 
. This 
delay in the selection process was mainly caused by the need to resolve 
technical 
issues raised by the EIF before the implementation of the SMEG facility, 
such as 
agreeing on a definition of and measuring the additionality of the loan 
guarantees 
(see paragraph 84). Altogether, this led to a significant time gap in the 
transition of 
the successive programmes.
To preserve the continuity of the support a “retroactivity clause” was 
introduced
34.	The continuity of the support is important for the financial 
intermediaries as 
some introduced specific loan products tailored to the needs of the SMEG 
facility. 
The interruption of EU support could cause higher losses to the financial 
intermediaries if the product was maintained without the EU guarantee.  
35.	The “retroactivity clause” was introduced with the aim of minimising 
the time 
gap between the two successive programmes and preserving continuity 
between 
the MAP and CIP programmes. This clause enabled the financial 
intermediaries to 
retroactively include loans to be supported by the facility which they 
had entered 
into between the end of the availability period under MAP and the date on 
which 
their CIP guarantee agreement was signed. 
36.	As a result, the equal treatment of financial intermediaries was not 
ensured 
since the financial intermediaries which had participated in the MAP 
benefited 
from favourable treatment through the retroactive inclusion of loans. 
Loans could 
be retroactively included as from September 2007, whereas new financial 
intermediaries could only include loans once their guarantee agreement 
with the 
EIF  had been signed.
37.	Although the retroactivity clause was designed to resolve the 
financial 
intermediaries’ funding gap between MAP and CIP, it could not always 
prevent a 
disruption of EU support to SMEs. This was the case for two of the nine 
financial 
intermediaries visited for which the availability period under MAP ended 
before 
the start of the CIP availability period (a gap of four months). 
Appropriate management framework established to operate the SMEG 
facility 
38.	The SMEG facility operates under the joint management of the 
Commission 
and the EIF . To ensure a successful delegation, the FMA and the related 
operational guidelines should include:
-	a definition of the action to be implemented, such as the specific 
objectives 
per window (see Box 1 for a description of the windows);
-	the management structure for the implementation of the tasks; and
-	the setting up of an adequate fee structure for the services provided 
by the 
EIF.
39.	Article 3 of the FMA stipulates the tasks the EIF has to implement 
(see Box 2): 
Box 2 – EIF main tasks for managing the SMEG facility:
- Identification, evaluation and selection of financial intermediaries;
- Determination of, and agreement with, the financial intermediaries on 
the nature 
and detailed conditions of the EU guarantees; 
- Decisions to commit funds; and
- Execution, management and termination of the EU guarantees (including 
reporting and monitoring).
40.	For each SMEG window, operational guidelines  were developed 
detailing the 
specific purpose, the selection of the intermediaries, the eligibility 
criteria, the EU 
guarantee and the modus operandi. The Commission issued Guidance on 
Enhanced Access to Finance on 29 October 2007 to supplement these 
operational guidelines, in particular the provisions of the FMA on 
establishing the 
parameters of the guarantee agreement. 
41.	The management structure established for the SMEG facility was 
appropriate 
as it improved the operational guidelines and the other provisions for 
the 
implementation of the tasks compared with those under the MAP, since they 
cover all tasks to be carried out in sufficient detail.  
42.	The fees to be paid to the EIF should be calculated so as to take 
into account:
-	performance in achieving specific targets;
-	the geographical distribution in the eligible countries; and
-	the degree of novelty and complexity of the guarantee instrument.
43.	The EIF fee scheme has been improved under CIP compared to MAP since:
-	the fee structure has been split into four distinctive components 
better 
reflecting the associated workload for each task; and 
-	the fee entitlement is triggered by the achievement of specific 
results (see  
Table 3).
Table 3 - Overview of the four incentives fees that constitute EIF 
remuneration
Type of incentive 
fee
To mainly encourage :
Start-up Fee
Setting-up the programme within 12 months
Signature Fee
Broad geographical coverage of the programme and use of 
specific windows
Implementation Fee
Additional volume achieved and daily operations
Monitoring Fee
Assurance of sound financial management
Source: Annex 13 of the Fiduciary and Management Agreement.
44.	The EIF “signature fee” gives a specific bonus for wide geographic 
coverage of 
intermediaries. Furthermore, fees are paid for the participation of 
intermediaries in 
countries that were not covered before and also for new intermediaries 
who did 
not participate under the previous programmes. 
45.	Despite the incentive fee for using specific windows, the equity and 
quasi-
equity guarantees and securitisation windows had not been utilised as at 
31 
December 2009. This is partly due to the financial crisis which 
negatively 
impacted the securitisation market as a whole.
Selection of financial intermediaries
46.	The audit assessed the selection process in respect of the following:
-	whether the framework guiding the EIF on the selection of financial 
intermediaries was complete and ensured fair and transparent selection; 
-	whether the agreement parameters, determining the extent of the EU’s 
intervention, had been correctly set; and
-	whether policy objectives had been correctly translated into the 
guarantee 
agreements.
Well designed selection framework
47.	The appraisal process should apply common standards to evaluating 
financial 
intermediaries, so as to ensure fair, structured and transparent 
selection. The EIF 
and the Commission should create and apply minimum standards for the 
selection 
of potential intermediaries. 
48.	The Commission empowered the EIF  to select intermediaries by 
applying 
the selection criteria and process set out in the relevant guarantee 
policies . The 
guarantee policies further state that the intermediaries are to be 
selected in 
conformity with best practice. An overview of the SMEG selection process 
carried 
out by the EIF is provided in Box 3.
Box 3 – the EIF’s selection process for intermediaries
*	Analysis of intermediaries’ applications following an open call 
procedure
*	Pre-selection of the applications – standardised check on formal 
requirements
*	Due diligence process (including setting of guarantee parameters)
*	Independent opinion of the EIF’s Risk Management Department
*	Assessment by the EIF’s Compliance Department
*	Approval by the EIF Board of Directors and by the European Commission 
(Director ECFIN – L)
49.	When defining the facility’s management framework, the following 
criteria for 
selecting potential financial intermediaries were laid down in the FMA :
-	financial standing and operational capability of the intermediary and 
its ability 
to manage risk and to comply with the terms and conditions of the SMEG 
facility;
-	whether the intermediary guarantees debt and/or micro-credit 
financing 
provided by a wide range of lenders to SMEs;
-	geographic coverage (loan window only);
-	possibility of providing mentoring and business support (micro credit 
window 
only); and
-	acceptance of the “Enhanced Access to Finance” criterion (see 
paragraph 
54).
50.	The Court considers the criteria for the selection of financial 
intermediaries to 
be in line with practices in comparable financial institutions. However, 
neither the 
Commission nor the EIF set scoring standards against which the 
intermediaries’ 
applications could have been assessed, rated and compared according to 
their 
degree of compliance with those criteria. The lack of precision regarding 
the 
selection criteria allowed the EIF to exercise a high level of discretion 
in 
evaluating the applications. 
Insufficient records justifying the agreement parameters 
51.	The two main parameters of the guarantee agreements are the reference 
volume and the guarantee cap rate. The reference volume represents the 
amount 
of guarantees or financing which the intermediary could “reasonably be 
expected 
to achieve […] in the absence of the EU guarantee” . The reference volume 
further serves as a basis for the computation of additional agreement 
parameters. 
The guarantee cap rate  refers to the maximum amount of losses for which 
the 
EIF is liable under a guarantee agreement. Both parameters are key 
factors as 
they will determine:
(a)	whether the EU intervention is additional to the guarantee scheme’s 
existing 
level of activity or simply replaces it; and
(b)	the maximum level of budgetary exposure the EU is expected to face 
under a 
specific agreement.
52.	In accordance with the FMA and with the Guidance on Enhanced Access 
to 
Finance, the volumes, including the reference volume, are determined on 
the 
basis of the EIF’s professional judgement, based on past budgets and loss 
rates 
or forecasts (especially for public guarantee schemes) and considering 
the market 
conditions and their evolution over time. 
53.	Weaknesses were found in the EIF’s documentation relating to the 
setting of 
the agreement parameters, including the reference volume and the cap 
rate. Only 
a summary of the results of the due-diligence step is included in the 
EIF’s request 
for the Board of Directors’ approval. When setting these parameters, the 
EIF 
takes as a basis the information provided by the financial intermediary. 
No 
evidence was found that the EIF verified this information.
Policy objectives not fully defined in the guarantee agreements
54.	Each guarantee agreement should contribute to the achievement of the 
policy 
objectives by specifying exactly what should be achieved. The general 
undertakings applicable to every intermediary in the guarantee agreements 
include principles of enhanced access to finance. These principles are 
derived 
from the broader objectives set out in the legal basis  and in the FMA 
and reflect 
these objectives appropriately. Box 4 presents the principles applicable 
to the 
loan window.
Box 4 - Principles of enhanced access to finance as per guarantee 
agreement (loan window)
The purpose of this agreement is the provision of a guarantee by the ElF 
to the 
intermediary in order to partially cover the intermediary’s portfolio 
risk with a 
view to:

(i) enhancing SMEs' access to finance;
(ii) reducing the particular difficulties that SMEs face in accessing 
finance, 
either due to the perceived higher risk associated with investment in 
certain 
knowledge-related activities such as technological development, 
innovation 
and technology transfer, or due to the lack of sufficient collateral; and
(iii) stimulating job-creation by supporting SMEs with growth and 
employment 
creation.

55.	Besides these general provisions, specific financial intermediary 
guarantee 
terms may include “further qualitative undertakings in respect of 
enhanced access 
to finance”. However, some of the intermediary guarantee terms are 
inconsistent 
with the objectives of the CIP or provide little operational guidance. 
For instance: 
-	in respect of the lack of collateral aspect it was found for one 
intermediary 
that “in addition to complying with any relevant provision of this 
agreement 
[…] the intermediary undertakes […] to require a low collateral level in 
relation 
to intermediary transactions”. In this case the specific terms of the 
agreement 
translate the general conditions relating to the lack of collateral into 
reduced 
collateral requirements. However, this allows de facto all SMEs to 
benefit 
from the reduced collateral requirements and does not ensure that only 
SMEs 
effectively lacking collateral, and thus unable to borrow under usual 
commercial terms, benefit from the facility; and
-	the specific terms of the agreements leave broad discretion in the 
matter of 
interpretation of innovation. The same guarantee agreement stated, 
without 
providing any further explanation, “[…] the intermediary undertakes […] 
to 
enter into intermediary transactions with newly created SMEs or SMEs 
involved in innovative projects”.
Performance monitoring and reporting
56.	Effective monitoring and reporting requires relevant, reliable and 
timely 
information on the status of the policy implementation and the extent to 
which the 
policy objectives are being met. 
57.	Performance monitoring of the SMEG facility is carried out by both 
the 
Commission and the EIF (see Annex II). The information flows from the 
SMEs 
(i.e. final beneficiaries) through one or more layers (in the case of co- 
or counter-
guarantees) of financial intermediaries to the EIF and finally to the 
Commission. 
Financial intermediaries report to the EIF on a quarterly basis on the 
SMEG 
facility. Based on this information, the EIF prepares quarterly 
consolidated reports 
for the Commission, which then uses these reports for the annual 
implementation 
reports on the EIP and on the CIP. 
58.	The Court examined the following aspects of performance monitoring 
and 
reporting:
-	whether the Commission established a balanced set of performance 
indicators to reliably measure the status of policy implementation; and
-	whether the reporting requirements are clear and reasonable.
Performance indicators were established, but should be more stable and 
balanced
59.	The prerequisite for effective monitoring (i.e. to measure progress 
of the 
implementation of the SMEG facility) is the definition of a set of clear 
indicators 
and associated targets. Indicators should be relatively stable so that 
changes over 
time can be observed and compared. 
60.	The SMEG performance indicators should contribute to an assessment of 
the 
achievement of the programme’s specific objectives as laid down in the 
legal 
basis and the global objectives of the European Union policy from which 
these 
objectives are derived. 
61.	For SMEG the Commission established six indicators (see Table 4). 
Table 4 – SMEG indicators established by the Commission

SMEG indicators
Indicators 
foreseen in 
the ex-ante 
impact 
assessment1
Indicators in 
the EIP Work 
Programme 
2009
Indicators reported 
in the EIP 
Implementation 
Report 2009
Indicators in 
the EIP Work 
Programme 
2010
Type of 
indicator
1
EC commitment 
to debt finance 
and total financing 
guaranteed
n/a
n/a
111,8 million euro 
(cap amount) 
guaranteeing an 
actual loan volume of 
2 771 million euro
Yes, but no 
target value was 
assigned
Output
2
The number of 
jobs created or 
maintained in 
SMEs receiving 
new financing
315 7502

Yes, but no 
target value was 
assigned
Number of employees 
at inclusion date: 
151 475
Yes, but no 
target value was 
assigned
Impact
3
The number of 
SMEs receiving 
new financing
315 750
Yes, but no 
target value was 
assigned
47 791
Yes, but no 
target value was 
assigned
Output
4
Number of SMEs 
supported, 
classified by 
sector of activity 
n/a
n/a
n/a3
Yes, but no 
target value was 
assigned
Output
5
The change in the 
volume of 
investment 
financing
Yes, but no 
target value 
was assigned
Yes, but no 
target value was 
assigned
Not reported.
n/a
Result
6
Total net 
disbursement
Yes, but no 
target value 
was assigned
Yes, but no 
target value was 
assigned
Not reported.
n/a
Output
1	Annex to the Proposal for a Decision of the European Parliament and 
of the Council establishing a 
Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme (2007-2013), SEC(2005) 
433.
2	One job created or maintained for each SME receiving new financing. 
The Commission considers 
that as the data of the Growth and Employment initiative indicate that 
beneficiary SMEs created 
on average 1.2 jobs, a more conservative ratio should be used to account 
for the fact that micro-
credit guarantee corresponds to more than 20 % of all companies reached 
by SMEG and thus, 
fewer jobs are expected to be created by these companies bringing down 
the overall average.
3	The information can be found in the EIF quarterly reports only.
62.	Of the four indicators (numbers 2, 3, 5, and 6) included in the ex-
ante 
evaluation and in the EIP 2009 Work Programme, only two were carried over 
(numbers 2 and 3) to the Commission’s EIP Implementation Report. In the 
EIP 
2010 Work Programme, two initial indicators were dropped (numbers 5 and 
6) and 
two new indicators were added (numbers 1 and 4). These changes, made in 
2010, were a reaction to a study on the evaluation of the indicators . 
63.	In the ex-ante evaluation only two indicators (numbers 2 and 3) had 
target 
values assigned to them. The EIP 2009 and 2010 Work Programmes did not 
set 
targets for the indicators to achieve in the respective period. In the 
absence of 
target values, it is difficult to assess whether the programme is 
developing as 
expected.
64.	Even though the Commission tried to create a balanced set of 
measurable 
indicators, including output, impact and result indicators, the only 
result indicator 
(number 5) was not carried over and was finally dropped by the 
Commission. The 
only impact indicator (number 2) is problematic (see paragraphs 67 and 
68) and 
all remaining indicators are output indicators. Thus, the indicators have 
become 
more of an instrument of operational management than an indicator to 
measure 
the impact and the success of the programme. It is difficult to strike 
the right 
balance between collecting the data economically and monitoring 
performance 
effectively. The evaluators of the EIP indicators suggested a set of 
balanced 
indicators including data collection methods and timing . 
65.	If meaningful conclusions as to the achievements of the SMEG 
programme 
are to be drawn, it is essential that the monitoring data provided by the 
financial 
intermediaries should be reliable, i.e. accurate and complete. 
66.	The financial intermediaries visited by the Court had all established 
procedures for collecting the data necessary for reporting to the EIF. 
The quality 
of the reporting processes at intermediary level is checked during the 
on-site 
monitoring visits by the EIF. 
67.	The collection of data related to “the number of jobs created” 
indicator poses 
difficulties for some financial intermediaries. In some countries the 
data are 
obtained from governmental institutions , some financial intermediaries 
collected 
them on a sample basis , others made calculations using expected values  
or 
the financial intermediaries did not update employment data annually as 
it would 
be too burdensome . Since the quality of employment data varies from 
country to 
country, adding them up raises concerns as to the reliability of the 
value of the 
indicator concerning the number of jobs created (number 2).
68.	Another problem with this indicator is that the values are taken from 
the 
number of persons employed by the supported SMEs, which is not equivalent 
to 
the number of jobs created or maintained at SMEs receiving new financing. 
The 
new financing received by an SME is not the only factor which leads to 
maintaining or creating jobs. There is no analysis as to how the 
guaranteed loan 
contributed to maintaining or creating jobs. 
Reporting requirements are clear and reasonable and only some financial 
intermediaries consider them a burden
69.	Financial intermediaries should have clear reporting requirements in 
order to 
collect the data for monitoring and reporting on the SMEG programme. Time 
and 
resources to obtain the required information for the indicators should 
not create an 
unnecessary administrative burden. 
70.	Financial intermediaries are required to collect various data on the 
supported 
SMEs and report to the EIF on a regular basis (see Annex III). Reporting 
requirements are listed in the guarantee agreement between the EIF and 
the 
financial intermediary. To this end, clear guidelines  have been issued 
by the EIF 
to the financial intermediaries as to how to compile the requested data. 
Corroborating this statement, 88 % of the financial intermediaries agreed 
that the 
operational instructions provided by the EIF were clear . Furthermore, 98 
% of 
the financial intermediaries stated that the EIF is always willing to 
provide further 
information to clarify operational issues . 
71.	The results of the Court’s questionnaire also showed that only 20 % 
of 
financial intermediaries participating under the CIP and/or the MAP find 
the 
reporting requirements unreasonable . 
72.	In cases where data collection through financial intermediaries poses 
a lot of 
difficulties (for example, employment data), alternative methods of 
collecting 
information could have been more appropriate. Both reports, “Evaluation 
of the 
Indicators of the EIP” and the “Interim evaluation of the EIP”, suggested 
using 
surveys in the context of an evaluation.
Achievements of the SMEG facility
73.	This section describes the outputs delivered by the SMEG facility. 
The outputs 
are analysed in relation to the facility’s objectives. Furthermore, the 
European 
added value of the facility is examined, in particular whether the 
facility’s 
objectives are better achieved by implementation at Community level than 
at 
national or regional level.
Outputs of the SMEG facility
74.	The CIP financial instruments should “improve (…) access to finance 
for the 
start-up and growth of SMEs and investment in innovation activities ”. 
More 
specifically, the SMEG facility under CIP sets out to: 
-	reach 315 750 SMEs ;
-	guarantee loans that finance SMEs’ innovative investments  or are 
provided 
to SMEs lacking sufficient collateral; and therefore
-	enhance access to finance where the market fails.
75.	The following analysis was based on a review of the loan sample 
selected by 
the Court . As regards investments in certain knowledge-related 
activities such 
as technological development, innovation and technology transfer, 
reference is 
made to the OECD Oslo Manual for the measurement of scientific and 
technological activities . 
The overall target of reaching 315 750 SMEs is attainable
76.	All financial intermediaries visited clearly targeted SMEs and all 
had 
procedures in place to verify the SME status of the borrower.
77.	As regards the overall target of reaching 315 750 SMEs , the 
Commission 
and the EIF made a successful effort to overcome the consequences of the 
initial 
delay (see paragraph 32) by concentrating on the larger financial 
intermediaries. 
In the three years since the CIP came in force, the EIF has signed 25 
deals with 
21 financial intermediaries (see Table 2). At the end of 2009, the total 
guarantee 
cap amount  of these guarantee agreements stood at 191,1 million euro, 
representing 37,5 % of the overall budget for the SMEG facility. The 
financial 
intermediaries had provided loans to almost 59 000 SMEs, representing 19 
% of 
the target number of SMEs. Taking into account the results from the MAP, 
the 
signed guarantee agreements reach more than half of the target number of 
SMEs 
(57,4 %) if the maximum portfolio amount is reached for each of these 
agreements  (see Figure 3). Therefore, the progress in implementation is 
sufficient to expect that the overall target of reaching 315 750 SMEs 
will be 
attained.
Figure 3 - Outputs of the SMEG facility under CIP as at the end of 2009
 
Source: European Court of Auditors.
The facility reaches SMEs which lack collateral; innovative projects are 
scarce
78.	The SMEG facility is designed to enhance access to debt funding for 
SMEs 
that have viable projects but are unable to secure a loan from commercial 
lenders. 
Such a situation can occur if an SME does not have sufficient collateral 
to fulfil the 
requirements of a commercial lender. Alternatively, the SME can be denied 
access to loan financing if the commercial lenders are not in a position 
to easily 
estimate the viability of the business proposition, as might be the case 
for 
innovative investments. The more novel the investment, the less likely it 
is that a 
loan will be granted.
79.	Based on the responses to the Court’s questionnaire, the CIP 
financial 
intermediaries aimed to target primarily SMEs without sufficient 
collateral, 
secondly micro enterprises and then start-ups. The innovative SMEs 
represent 
the category that is least targeted. While 90 % of the intermediaries 
agreed with 
the statement that their CIP-guaranteed product was aimed at customers 
that did 
not have sufficient collateral, only approximately half of the 
intermediaries agreed 
with the statement that their CIP-guaranteed product was aimed at 
innovative 
SMEs (see Figure 4).
Figure 4 - Survey of Financial Intermediaries – SMEs targeted by the 
guarantee/loan product
 
Source: ECA questionnaire to the financial intermediaries.
80.	The analysis of the loan sample shows that SMEs with a lack of 
collateral 
benefited more often than SMEs that were carrying out innovative 
investments. 
Out of the 181 loans in the sample, 77 loans (43 %) were provided to SMEs 
that 
lacked sufficient collateral to gain access to finance through existing 
commercial 
lending. Only 22 loans (12 %) were used to finance projects that had 
innovative 
aspects (see Table 5).

Table 5 - Results of the loan analysis in terms of number of loans and 
percentage 
of sample size

SMEs that lack 
sufficient1 
collateral
SMEs with 
sufficient 
collateral
Lack of collateral 
not 
demonstrated
Total
Loans used to finance 
innovative 
investments
7
4 %
12
7 %
3
2 %
22
12 %
Loans used to finance 
projects without 
significant innovative 
element
70
39 %
69
38 %
20
11 %
159
88 %
Total 
77
43 %
81
45 %
23
13 %
181
100 %
1 In the cases where a financial intermediary defined the level of 
sufficient collateral or this level 
could be implicitly deduced, this was applied to determine the 
“sufficiency” of the collateral. In the 
remaining cases, an SME was considered to possess sufficient collateral 
if the loan amount did 
not exceed 70 % of the value of realisable assets. In the latter 
category, other factors which 
increased the risk profile of the SME were also taken into account (e.g. 
loans to unemployed) and 
as a result these SMEs were considered as “SMEs that lack sufficient 
collateral”.
Source: European Court of Auditors.
81.	Although innovative investments were rare, the loan sample included 
some 
highly innovative investments. Half of the innovative projects (11 out of 
22) were 
assessed as market-new or world-new types of innovation. These projects 
aimed 
at creating new or significantly improved products, production processes 
or 
delivery methods that were new at least for the operating market of the 
enterprise. 
For an example of such an investment, see Box 5. The remaining innovative 
investments could be described as a novelty only for the enterprise 
concerned, 
and were already being implemented by other firms that were directly 
competing 
with the borrower.


Box 5 - Example of an innovative project
The entrepreneur did not have sufficient collateral to secure a normal 
commercial 
loan of 40 000 euro. However, in his previous job as a researcher he had 
acquired 
significant knowledge about the production of vinegar. He therefore, used 
the 
guaranteed loan to start up a company producing high-quality vinegar. The 
production process used specifically cultivated bacteria that made the 
fermentation process more stable. The resulting vinegar had a better 
taste and 
higher sugar content – qualities appreciated by consumers. The company’s 
operating market was regional and there were no other competitors using 
the 
same production process.
82.	However, for 23 loans no assessment could be made regarding the 
reported 
lack of collateral due to the absence of information at the financial 
intermediaries. 
Financial intermediaries strive for additional lending volumes, but more 
attention 
could have been paid to deadweight
83.	In guarantee schemes, “deadweight” occurs if the borrower could have 
obtained the loan from commercial lenders without public support. In such 
situations, the effects, such as creation of jobs, economic or innovation 
activity, 
would have been realised anyway. Publicly supported guarantee schemes are 
most effective when the financed investment would otherwise not have been 
carried out, and the desired effects would not have been realised. 
84.	To ensure that the SMEG facility provides additional access to 
finance for 
SMEs, the Commission has developed Guidance on Enhanced Access to 
Finance. This aims to ensure that the financial intermediary can use the 
portfolio 
guarantee only after the actual lending volume exceeds the lending volume 
that 
the intermediary would have achieved without the guarantee. This concept 
of 
additionality is simple to use and can be easily embedded into the 
guarantee 
agreement.
85.	However, additionality does not ensure that the additional volume at 
the level 
of the financial intermediary is also additional at the level of the 
economy. In the 
context of the SMEG facility, it is considered that deadweight occurs if 
guarantees 
are provided for loans to SMEs with sufficient collateral and without 
innovative 
investments. However, when providing assistance on protfolio basis, a 
certain 
level of deadweight is inevitable. The loan analysis revealed deadweight 
in more 
than a third of the loans in the sample (38 %, 69 out of 181, see Table 
5). Other 
things being equal, these borrowers could have obtained the loans from 
commercial lenders without the SME guarantee. A survey of the MAP 
borrowers 
conducted by the interim evaluator showed a similar level of deadweight .
Specific lending conditions
86.	Each guarantee agreement between the EIF and the financial 
intermediary 
contains a standard clause listing the principles of enhanced access to 
finance 
(see paragraph 54) for the benefit of SMEs without collateral or with 
innovative 
investments. There is not always a clear indication as to how the 
financial 
intermediary intends to target them. Some financial intermediaries used 
specific 
lending conditions to attract such SMEs, thus minimising deadweight (see 
Box 6).
Box 6 - Lending conditions to attract either innovative SMEs or SMEs 
without 
sufficient collateral 
*	The guaranteed loans can be provided only to start-ups and SMEs with 
a short 
business history
*	Ceiling on the loan amount
*	Providing non-monetary benefits to the SMEs  so that the guaranteed 
loans 
are not cheaper than non-guaranteed loans
*	Higher guarantee rates for investments that are innovative or 
constitute to 
some extent a novelty

87.	While the first three lending conditions will lead to automatic 
preference for 
borrowers that lack collateral, the last condition will probably increase 
the interest 
of innovative SMEs. The relative absence of lending conditions geared 
towards 
innovative SMEs may explain the low number of innovative investments 
found in 
the sample (see Table 5).
European added value
88.	As all the fields covered by the CIP are the shared responsibility of 
the 
Member States and the Community , the SMEG facility also has to respect 
the 
subsidiarity principle stipulated in Article 5 of the Treaty. EU actions 
not falling 
within the exclusive competence of the Union, such as the SMEG facility, 
should 
be undertaken only if, and in so far, as the objectives of the proposed 
action 
cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member States, but can rather, by 
reason 
of the scale or effects of the proposed action, be better achieved at the 
EU level.
89.	The concept of subsidiarity is reiterated in a recital preceding the 
CIP 
decision , in the CIP proposal  and in the CIP impact assessment . In 
essence, 
the arguments used by the Commission in favour of the EU dimension of the 
financial instruments can be grouped under two headings:
-	ensuring coherence in implementation; and 
-	the global nature of competition and innovation.
The SMEG facility may have sizeable non-monetary benefits for an 
intermediary; 
however consistency of implementation is not actively striven for
90.	In its CIP preparatory documents, the Commission argued that the 
European 
dimension would ensure diffusion of good practice in the delivery of 
financial 
instruments, including the SMEG facility. Although similar measures exist 
in some 
Member States, the Community intervention will contribute to the 
consistency of 
implementation.
91.	Several cases were found in which the financing from the EU budget 
was 
crucial, not only as a partial coverage of the credit losses, but also 
because it 
allowed the intermediary to try something new. In two instances the SMEG 
facility 
helped with the development of guarantee or lending products that were 
new to 
the intermediary. For one of them, multiple attempts had to be made until 
the 
product gained sufficient recognition from the on-lending banks and the 
clients. It 
can be assumed that the product would not have been developed if the EIF 
and 
the Commission had not repeatedly collaborated with that intermediary. 
Furthermore, cooperation with the EU institutions may help smaller 
private 
financial intermediaries especially to gain recognition among the on-
lending banks 
and/or their clients. 
92.	This is corroborated by the result of the questionnaire sent to the 
financial 
intermediaries. 6 out of 31 CIP intermediaries  have developed a new loan 
or 
guarantee product and 16 out of 31 have significantly modified their 
existing 
products to participate in the CIP. 
93.	The SMEG facility increases the visibility of EU support among 
financial 
intermediaries. The audit visits showed that awareness of the EU 
guarantees 
among SMEs was not very high. However, actively driven attempts to ensure 
consistency between the practices of different intermediaries were not 
observed. 
The EIF simply collects the information about the practices of the 
financial 
intermediaries, but does not question these practices. As has been shown 
in the 
case of lending conditions (see paragraph 86), a more active approach by 
the EIF 
might improve take-up of the facility by SMEs with innovative projects or 
insufficient collateral.
The SMEG facility increases the competitiveness of individual 
enterprises; this 
does not imply that EU added value is delivered
94.	This aspect of EU added value is directly related to one of the CIP 
global 
objectives: “to foster the competitiveness of enterprises, in particular 
of SMEs” . 
In the preparatory documents, the Commission argued that the competition 
European firms face is increasingly global and innovation is seen as a 
global 
phenomenon that is not successful and sustainable in a closed 
environment.
95.	The loan analysis showed that the SMEG facility does indeed help 
individual 
enterprises to increase their competitiveness. It was found that 74 out 
of 
181 loans (41 %) were directly used to increase the enterprise’s 
competitiveness . The SMEG facility delivers many other valuable results 
in 
relation to the creation of a more competitive environment. It enables 
small start-
ups - mainly in the service sector - to emerge. Out of the 181 loans in 
the sample, 
26 loans (14 %) were used to start a new business and 15 loans (8 %) were 
used 
to finance post-start-up expansions of the business . It also helps to 
maintain the 
competitive landscape allowing individuals to become entrepreneurs by 
buying an 
existing SME (47 loans, 26 %).
96.	However, the EU added value of these results is not conclusive as the 
same 
effects could be achieved with funding from national budgets. For 
instance, the 
Commission  gives three suggestions on how an EU policy may impact 
competitiveness at the EU level . The EU policy might:
-	have an impact on the competitive position of EU firms in comparison 
with 
their non-EU rivals;
-	stimulate cross-border investment flows, including relocation of 
economic 
activity; or 
-	be necessary to correct undesirable outcomes of market processes in 
European markets.
97.	None of these effects were observed during the audit. The loan 
analysis 
confirmed that most of the SMEs are operating in local, regional or 
national 
markets. 19 out of 181 loans (10 %) were provided to SMEs that had some 
cross-
border activities and 13 loans (7 %) were used for investments that had a 
significant cross-border element . The scarcity of cross-border 
activities is not 
surprising given the types of businesses of the SMEs in the sample (for 
an 
overview, see Figure 5): 17 restaurants, 8 taxi drivers, 41 small retail 
shops 
(bakery, butcher, newspaper shop or supermarket) or 17 craftsmen 
(carpenter, 
electrician, mason or roofer). Given these examples of borrowers whose 
businesses are usually local, the need for EU intervention is not 
sufficiently 
demonstrated.
Figure 5 - Loan Analysis – Types of Businesses 
 
Source: European Court of Auditors.
98.	Indeed, the scale of the individual guarantee deals does not go 
beyond 
national borders. In essence the SMEG facility operates as a set of 
national 
guarantee schemes, because there are significant differences between the 
national debt markets . These differences are caused by cultural as well 
as legal 
constraints and are so significant that the debt markets can be 
considered to be 
purely national.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Design of the SMEG facility
99.	Although no explicit intervention logic was provided in the CIP 
preparatory 
documents for the SMEG facility, an implicit intervention logic can be 
found in the 
different preparatory documents of the CIP Decision. However, there is no 
conceptual link between the problem at stake and the expected results and 
impacts as presented before the start of the intervention. Although the 
objectives 
are now more precise than under the previous MAP programme, they are only 
specific, measurable, achievable and timed in relation to the expected 
outputs. 
Recommendation 1
Future SME support programmes should be based upon an explicit 
intervention 
logic linking the inputs to the expected outputs, results and impacts. 
Setting the management structure
100.	Overall an appropriate framework has been established for the 
management 
of the SMEG facility. The fee structure has been improved compared to MAP 
by 
adding performance triggered incentives. However, delays in the planning 
of the 
facility prevented effective budget allocation during the first year and 
caused an 
interruption of the support for some financial intermediaries.
Recommendation 2
For the purpose of planning any subsequent facility, the Court recommends 
finalising the legal basis and the management agreement well before the 
effective 
start of the programming period in order to have time to select adequate 
financial 
intermediaries and to complete contract negotiations with them by the 
effective 
start of the programming period, thus avoiding the need to have recourse 
to any 
retroactivity clause in the future.
Selection of financial intermediaries
101.	The Commission devised appropriate procedures for the selection of 
financial intermediaries. However, no scoring standards were established 
to rate 
the applications from the different potential intermediaries and no 
minimum 
requirements are defined for the different selection criteria. Weaknesses 
were 
found in the documentation of the parameters setting in the guarantee 
agreements with financial intermediaries. 
Recommendation 3
To enhance the transparency of the selection, a scoring system for the 
assessment of potential intermediary applications should be put in place 
for any 
successor programme. Minimum requirements should be defined for the 
selection 
of financial intermediaries. The calculation of the parameters in the 
guarantee 
agreements should be documented in greater detail. 
Performance monitoring and reporting 
102.	Sufficient output indicators were established which were used to 
report on  
SMEG’s implementation. The data for the only impact indicator which 
refers to the 
“number of jobs created” is difficult to collect and, due to varying 
calculation 
methods, not comparable between countries. Reporting requirements are 
clear 
and not perceived as a burden by a majority of the financial 
intermediaries 
participating in SMEG.
Recommendation 4
The Commission should consider the scope for creating additional or 
better 
performance indicators in order to monitor better the achievements of the 
facility’s 
objectives and draw appropriate conclusions. 
Achievements of the SMEG facility
103.	The only quantified target, that of reaching 315 750 SMEs, is 
likely to be 
achieved. The analysis of the Court’s sample of loans showed that less 
than half 
of the loans (43 %) were given to SMEs that had a lack of sufficient 
collateral and 
only 12 % used the loans for innovative investments. The loan analysis 
revealed a 
deadweight of 38 %, i.e. loans made to SMEs with sufficient collateral 
and not 
using them for innovation.
Recommendation 5
The Commission should in future set more specific targets which better 
reflect the 
objectives of the financial instrument. During the lifetime of the 
instrument 
monitoring should measure progress towards achieving such targets, 
allowing 
remedial action to be taken as necessary. Appropriate measures to 
minimise 
deadweight should be envisaged, drawing inter alia on best practices 
already in 
place at certain intermediaries.
104.	The SMEG facility enabled some financial intermediaries to develop 
and 
offer new lending or guarantee products, but no active identification and 
dissemination of good practices is undertaken. The EU added value of SMEG 
is 
not demonstrated as the results from SMEG might also have been achieved 
by 
funding under national schemes. Significant cross-border investments or 
effects of 
the SMEG loans were not observed. 
Recommendation 6
As the Court emphasised in the past, expenditure from the Union budget 
must 
offer clear and visible benefits for the EU and for its citizens which 
could not be 
achieved by spending only at national, regional or local level.  The 
Budgetary 
authorities and the Commission should therefore consider how EU added 
value 
could be maximised in any successor to the SMEG facility.


This Report was adopted by Chamber IV, headed by Mr Igors LUDBORŽS, 
Member of the Court of Auditors, in Luxembourg at its meeting of 22 March 
2011.
	For the Court of Auditors

	Vítor Manuel da SILVA CALDEIRA 
	President

 	“Giving SMEs the credit they need”, The magazine of Enterprise 
Policy, European 
Commission, 12.2.2009.
 	COM(2005) 551 final, 10.11.2005.
  	Observatory of European SMEs, Analytical Report, November 2006-
January 2007, 
Flash Eurobarometer. 
 	COM(2005) 24 final, 2.2.2005.
  	Lisbon European Council 23 and 24 March 2000, Presidency Conclusions. 
  	Decision 1639/2006/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council 
of 24 
October 2006 establishing a Competitiveness and Innovation Framework 
Programme (2007 to 2013) (OJ L 310, 9.11.2006, p. 15).
 	Council Decision 2000/819/EC of 20 December 2000 on a multiannual 
programme 
for enterprise and entrepreneurship, and in particular for small and 
medium-sized 
enterprises (SMEs) (2001-2005) (OJ L 333, 29.12.2000, p. 84).
  	The EIF is the European Union body specialised in providing guarantee 
instruments 
and risk-capital for SMEs.
  	Fiduciary and Management Agreement dated 20.9.2007 between the 
European 
Community and the EIF for the SMEG facility under the Competitiveness and 
Innovation Framework Programme (2007-2013).
  	A co-guarantee provides a second guarantee in addition to the main 
guarantee to 
the lender, whereas a counter-guarantee guarantees part of the first 
guarantor’s 
guarantee. 
  	“Guarantee deals” are the individual guarantee agreements between the 
EIF and a 
financial intermediary and the activities performed on the basis of these 
agreements. 
  	Commission Recommendation 2003/361/EC of 6 May 2003 concerning the 
definition 
of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (OJ L124, 20.5.2003, p. 36). 
  	Financial intermediaries in Belgium, France, Hungary, Slovenia, 
Italy, Spain and 
Germany were visited. 
  	Documentation concerning the proposal and approval of the loan, the 
assessment of 
the borrower’s credit risk and the purpose of the loan was inspected on 
the financial 
intermediaries’ premises. 
  	The questionnaire invited the intermediaries to answer 48 questions 
on topics such 
as: (i) the SMEG application process, (ii) the EIF’s management during 
the lifetime of 
the guarantee (iii), the guaranteed product, and (iv) the impact of the 
financial crisis 
on the products. In addition, the intermediaries that participated under 
the MAP but 
not the CIP were asked to indicate the reasons. 
  	Comments from both the EIF and Commission were taken into account 
when 
drafting the questions. A response rate of 82 % was obtained (42 out of 
51 financial 
intermediaries).
  	Commission Staff Working Document, Annex to the Proposal for a 
Decision of the 
European Parliament and of the Council establishing a Competitiveness and 
Innovation Framework Programme (2007-2013), SEC(2005) 433, 6.4.2005.
  	The interim evaluator recommended providing “a clear statement of 
intervention logic 
for each measure in order to improve the overall coherence of the 
programme and to 
demonstrate the impact”, European Commission “Interim Evaluation of the 
Entrepreneurship and Innovation Programme”, 2009. 
  	See for instance North, Baldock, Ekanem, Whittam and Wyper: “Access 
to Bank 
Finance for Scottish SMEs”, 2008. 
  	COM(2002) 276 final, 5.6.2002. 
  	The impact assessment considers the outputs such as number of loans 
or number of 
SMEs as impacts. However, the actual impact is lower than the outputs, 
because a 
part of the SMEs would have obtained the loans without the guarantee. 
  	Article 27(3) of Council Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 1605/2002 of 25 
June 2002 on 
the Financial Regulation applicable to the general budget of the European 
Communities (OJ L 248, 16.9.2002, p. 1).
  	The definition is taken from European Commission, Impact Assessment 
Guidelines, 
SEC(2005) 791, 15.6.2005.
  	CIP Decision, Article 2.
  	Immediate objectives concern the result of an intervention on direct 
addressees and 
take account of the envisaged specific domain and particular nature of 
the policy 
intervention under consideration. For SMEG, the relevant EIP objective is 
considered 
to be the immediate objective.
  	CIP Decision, Article 10.
 	Examples ofinnovation found in the sample: investment in new 
packaging and 
sorting technology in a warehouse, a new oven with additional 
functionalities in a 
bakery shop.
  	In accordance with Article 43(4) of Commission Regulation (EC, 
Euratom) 
No 2342/2002 of 23 December 2002 laying down detailed rules for the 
Implementation of Council Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 1605/2002 on the 
Financial 
Regulation applicable to the general budget of the European Communities 
(OJ L 
357, 31.12.2002, p. 1).
  	For SMEG: the Fiduciary and Management Agreement and the related 
operational 
guidelines (such as the “Guidance on Enhanced Access to Finance”).
  	The first guarantee agreement under the CIP between a financial 
intermediary and 
the EIF was signed on 2 September 2008.
  	Calculated on the basis of the nine intermediaries visited, the 
average number of 
days for processing a successful application under CIP was 323. 
  	Based on the questionnaire (Q6) sent to all FIs who applied under 
CIP. 
  	The first guarantee agreements under the CIP were signed in September 
2008.
  	In accordance with Article 53 of Council Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 
1605/2002.
  	Fiduciary and Management Agreement, Annexes 1A to 1D.
 	Fiduciary and Management Agreement, Article 3.1.
 	The Fiduciary and Management Agreement contains four guarantee 
policies relating 
to the four specific windows of the facility. The guarantee policies set 
out in specific 
terms the purpose of the underlying window, the selection process for 
intermediaries, 
the eligibility criteria, the modus operandi as regards enhanced access 
to finance, 
the reporting, the monitoring and audit, the promotion and the 
visibility.
 	Criteria corresponding to the loan and micro-credit windows. The 
selection criteria 
relating to the equity and securitisation windows were not examined as 
these 
windows were not used until 31 December 2009.
 	Guidance on Enhanced Access to Finance, 25 October 2007. 
 	The guarantee cap rate is a pre-agreed rate at which the EIF’s 
liability is capped 
under a guarantee agreement. The amount of the EIF’s liability under a 
guarantee 
agreement (guarantee cap) can be calculated by multiplying the actual 
portfolio 
volume by the guarantee rate and the guarantee cap rate. E.g. portfolio 
volume = 
1 000; guarantee rate = 50 %; guarantee cap rate = 10 %
Thus, maximum EIF liability (guarantee cap) = 1000 x 50 % x 10 % = 50.
 	CIP Decision, Article 19.
  	Evaluation of the Indicators of the EIP, February 2010.
  	To measure results and impacts, several indicators were suggested, 
for example 
contribution to the performance of beneficiaries (growth of sales, jobs 
created/maintained, new products or services developed) or total (or 
average) 
turnover growth of SMEs financed. 
  	For example an intermediary in Slovenia obtained the employment data 
from the 
national social security and insurance institution.
  	An intermediary in Spain collects the information annually from the 
Regional 
Guarantee Societies on a sample basis.
  	Another intermediary in Spain calculates the change in employment by 
comparing 
expectations at the time of the loan request compared with actual 
employment at the 
time of calculation.
  	For example, an intermediary in Italy collects only the employment 
data only in the 
initial guarantee application and does not update those at later stage.
  	“Manual for compiling reports under the SME guarantee facility 2007-
2013 (CIP)” – 
EIF.
 	Based on a questionnaire (Q14), 36 out of 41 financial intermediaries 
who answered 
this question agreed that the operational instructions provided by the 
EIF were clear.
  	Based on a questionnaire (Q15), 40 out of 41 financial intermediaries 
who answered 
this question agreed that the EIF is always willing to give explanations 
during the 
lifetime of the guarantee.
  	Based on a questionnaire (Q16), 8 out of 42 financial intermediaries 
who answered 
this question did not agree that the reporting requirements were 
reasonable.
  	CIP Decision, Article 10.
  	Annex to the Proposal for a Decision of the European Parliament and 
of the Council 
establishing a Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme (2007-
2013), 
SEC(2005) 433.
  	Relevant only for the loan window. CIP Decision, Article 19.2 refers 
to “investments 
in certain knowledge-related activities such as technological 
development, innovation 
and technology transfer”.
 	A sample of 181 loans was selected from the nine financial 
intermediaries visited. 
The number of loans chosen per intermediary reflecting the achieved 
guarantee 
volume and was limited to a range from 10 to 45. 
 	The OSLO Manual, Proposed guidelines for collecting and interpreting 
technological 
innovation data, OECD, 1997, also referred to in the recital 8 preceeding 
the CIP 
Decision and in the European Commission’s 2009 Impact assessment 
guidelines – 
SEC(2009) 92.
  	As provided in the CIP impact assessment, SEC(2005) 433.
  	The cap amount represents the ceiling of the costs for the EU budget 
and will 
materialize only if the financial intermediary reaches the maximum 
portfolio amount 
and realizes the expected losses on the loan portfolio.
  	For instance under the MAP, only two out of 45 financial 
intermediaries reached less 
than 90 % of the maximum portfolio amount. 
  	 “The survey results indicate that two out of three companies would 
not have 
undertaken the project without the guaranteed loan, or would have done 
less. Only 
one out of three companies surveyed, responded that they would have 
either set up 
the business or undertaken the project even without the guaranteed loan.”
  	Such as reduced collateral requirements, accelerated credit decisions 
and fixed 
interest rates. 
  	The Commission derived the legal bases of the CIP from Articles 172, 
173(3) and 
192(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union 
(consolidated version 
after Lisbon Treaty).
  	CIP Decision, recital 62.
  	COM(2005) 121 final, 6.4.2005.
  	SEC(2005) 433, 6.4.2005.
  	Intermediaries that participate or plan to participate under CIP.
  	CIP Decision, Article 2.
  	The enterprise’s competitiveness was deemed to have increased if the 
business plan 
included information that the investment would either:
*	increase the enterprise’s production capacity of goods or services; 
or make it 
more efficient;
*	increase its market share;
*	increase its exports;
*	increase the performance/training of its staff;
*	lead to more productive use of information technology; or
*	improve the marketing of its products or services.
Start-ups were considered separately as always increasing the competitive 
landscape.
  	Post start-up expansion means an expansion of the business within 
three years after 
the start-up.
  	Commission Staff Working Paper “Impact Assessment: Next Steps - In 
support of 
competitiveness and sustainable development”, SEC(2004) 1377.
  	Also mentioned in SEC(2005) 791.
  	The cross-border element was deemed significant if the aim of the 
investment was to 
increase production abroad, expand into markets abroad or create new 
business 
relations with foreign counterparts (e.g. suppliers).
  	Also noted for instance by the ECB, “The financing of Small and 
Medium-Sized 
Enterprises in the Euro area”, ECB Monthly Bulletin, August 2007, p. 77.
 	“Response by the European Court of Auditors to the Commission’s 
communication 
‘Reforming the Budget, Changing Europe’” (paragraphs 7 to 9), and Opinion 
1/2010 
“Improving the financial management of the European Union budget: Risks 
and challenges” 
(paragraphs 18 and 19).
